International         Organisation               Organización            Международная
Civil Aviation        de l’aviation civile       de Aviación Civil       организация
Organization          internationale             Internacional           гражданской
                                                                         авиации



  Tel.:     +1 514-315-2005

  Ref.:     AN 4/1.2.31-25/23                                                            24 April 2025

  Subject: Adoption of Amendment 18 to Annex 14,
  Volume I
  Action required: a) Notify any disapproval before
  4 August 2025; b) Notify any differences and
  compliance before 27 October 20251; c) Consider the
  use of the Electronic Filing of Differences (EFOD)
  System for notification of differences and compliance


 Sir/Madam,

 1.              I have the honour to inform you that Amendment 18 to the International Standards and
 Recommended Practices, Aerodromes, Aerodrome Design and Operations (Annex 14, Volume I to the
 Convention on International Civil Aviation) was adopted by the Council at the twelfth meeting of its
 234th Session on 28 March 2025. Copies of the Amendment and the Resolution of Adoption are available
 as attachments to the electronic version of this State letter on the ICAO-NET.

 2.               When adopting the amendment, the Council prescribed 4 August 2025 as the date on which
 it will become effective, except for any part concerning which a majority of Contracting States have
 registered their disapproval before that date. In addition, the Council resolved that Amendment 18, to the
 extent it becomes effective, will become applicable on 27 November 20252 unless otherwise indicated.

 3.            Amendment 18 arises from recommendations of the fourth meeting of the Aerodromes
 Design and Operations Panel (ADOP/4) concerning aerodrome design, visual aids, ground handling and
 apron management service and obstacle limitation surfaces (OLS).

 4.              The amendment concerning aerodrome design aims to better reflect the required strip
 width for code number 3 runways and will erase the geometric discrepancy in the widths of runway strips
 between the various code numbers for non-instrument (NINST) runways.

 5.             The amendment related to visual aids concerns runway distance remaining signs (RDRS);
 harmonization of aerodrome lighting requirements for CAT II operations below 350 m; threshold marking
 for paved runways; and visual aids to denote temporary runway closures and any other changes to the

 1 26 October 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 October 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation

   surfaces.
 2 26 November 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 November 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation

   surfaces.
999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard    Tel.: 514-954-8219       Email: icaohq@icao.int
Montréal, Quebec                 Fax: 514-954-6077        www.icao.int
Canada H3C 5H7
                                                             -2-

movement area at an operational aerodrome, etc. This amendment will help improve operational safety by
providing enhanced situational awareness to pilots through aerodrome visual aids. The existing
discrepancies between the design of visual aids and its operational requirements have also been addressed
in this amendment.

6.                The amendment concerning ground handling contains basic provisions related to the safety
oversight of ground handling. These provisions will help improve aviation safety through the reduction of
accidents, incidents and overall occurrences to aircraft, aerodrome facilities and personnel. The amendment
on apron management service will encourage apron management services to consider the requirements
related to ground handling safety when manoeuvring the aircraft onto and off the stand, in order to safeguard
the aircraft and ensure safety of personnel working around it.

7.               The amendment concerning obstacle limitation surfaces (OLS) includes a set (or sets) of
surfaces with clear purposes and characteristics ensuring that only the surfaces required are adopted, and
that they are performance-based and are adaptable to the type of operations conducted at the aerodrome.

8.              The subjects are given in the amendment to the Foreword of Annex 14, Volume I, a copy
of which is in Attachment A.

9.                 In conformity with the Resolution of Adoption, may I request:

                   a)    that before 4 August 2025, you inform me if there is any part of the adopted Standards
                         and Recommended Practices (SARPs) amendments in Amendment 18 concerning
                         which your Government wishes to register disapproval, using the form in
                         Attachment B for this purpose. Please note that only statements of disapproval need
                         be registered and if you do not reply it will be assumed that you do not disapprove of
                         the amendment;

                   b)    that before 27 October 20251 you inform me of the following, using the Electronic
                         Filing of Differences (EFOD) System or the form in Attachment C for this purpose:

                         1)   any differences that will exist on 27 November 20252 between the national
                              regulations or practices of your Government and the provisions of the whole of
                              Annex 14, Volume I as amended by all amendments up to and including
                              Amendment 18 and thereafter of any further differences that may arise; and

                         2)   the date or dates by which your Government will have complied with the
                              provisions of the whole of Annex 14, Volume I, as amended by all amendments
                              up to and including Amendment 18.

10.               With reference to the request in paragraph 9 a) above, it should be noted that a registration
of disapproval of Amendment 18 or any part of it in accordance with Article 90 of the Convention does not
constitute a notification of differences under Article 38 of the Convention. To comply with the latter
provision, a separate statement is necessary if any differences do exist, as requested in paragraph 9 b) 1). It
is recalled in this respect that international Standards in Annexes have a conditional binding force, to the



1 26 October 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 October 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation

 surfaces.
2 26 November 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 November 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation

 surfaces.
                                                   -3-

extent that the State or States concerned have not notified any difference thereto under Article 38 of the
Convention.

11.              With reference to the request in paragraph 9 b) above, it should be noted that the ICAO
Assembly, at its 39th Session (27 September to 6 October 2016), resolved that Member States should be
encouraged to use the EFOD System when notifying differences (Resolution A39-22 refers). The EFOD
System is currently available on the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) restricted
website http://www.icao.int/usoap which is accessible by all Member States. You are invited to consider
using this for notification of compliance and differences.

12.               Guidance on the determination and reporting of differences is given in the Note on the
Notification of Differences in Attachment D. Please note that a detailed repetition of previously notified
differences, if they continue to apply, may be avoided by stating the current validity of such differences.

13.             I would appreciate it if you would also send a copy of your notifications, referred to in
paragraph 9 b) above, to the ICAO Regional Office accredited to your Government.

14.             At the fifth meeting of its 204th Session, the Council requested that States, when being
advised of the adoption of an Annex amendment, be provided with information on implementation and
available guidance material, as well as an impact assessment. This is presented for your information in
Attachments E and F, respectively. An overview of the approval process for Amendment 18 to Annex 14,
Volume I, is also included for your information in Attachment G.

15.            As soon as practicable after the amendment becomes effective, on 4 August 2025,
replacement pages incorporating Amendment 18 will be forwarded to you.

                Accept, Sir/Madam, the assurances of my highest consideration.




                                                                          Juan Carlos Salazar
                                                                          Secretary General

Enclosures:
  A — Amendment to the Foreword of Annex 14, Volume I
  B — Form on notification of disapproval of all or part of
       Amendment 18 to Annex 14, Volume I
  C — Form on notification of compliance with or differences
       from Annex 14, Volume I
  D — Note on the Notification of Differences
  E — Implementation task list and outline of guidance material in
       relation to Amendment 18 to Annex 14, Volume I
  F — Impact assessment in relation to Amendment 18 to Annex 14,
       Volume I
  G — Overview of approval process for Amendment 18 to Annex 14,
       Volume I
                       ATTACHMENT A to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


              AMENDMENT TO THE FOREWORD OF ANNEX 14, VOLUME I


Add the following element at the end of Table A:

                                                                                     Adopted/Approved
                                                                                         Effective
  Amendment             Source(s)                          Subject(s)                   Applicable
                  Fourth meeting of the    a) runway strip width for code number
       18                                                                           28 March 2025
                  Aerodrome Design            3 non-instrument runway; runway
                                                                                    4 August 2025
                  and Operations Panel        distance remaining signs (RDRS);
                                                                                    27 November 2025
                  (ADOP/4)                    harmonization of aerodrome lighting
                                                                                      26 November 2026
                                              requirements for CAT II operations;
                                                                                      21 November 2030
                                              main beam average intensity of
                                              lights; threshold marking; closed
                                              runway lighting; unserviceability
                                              signs; apron management service;

                                           b) ground handling as of
                                              26 November 2026; and

                                           c) obstacle limitation surfaces as of
                                              21 November 2030.




                                      ————————
                          ATTACHMENT B to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


                   NOTIFICATION OF DISAPPROVAL OF ALL OR PART OF
                        AMENDMENT 18 TO ANNEX 14, VOLUME I


To: The Secretary General
    International Civil Aviation Organization
    999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard
    Montréal, Quebec
    Canada H3C 5H7


(State) ____________________________________ hereby wishes to disapprove the following parts of
Amendment 18 to Annex 14, Volume I




Signature ________________________________________                        Date ____________________



NOTES

1)   If you wish to disapprove all or part of Amendment 18 to Annex 14, Volume I, please dispatch this
     notification of disapproval to reach ICAO Headquarters by 4 August 2025. If it has not been received
     by that date it will be assumed that you do not disapprove of the amendment. If you approve of all
     parts of Amendment 18 it is not necessary to return this notification of disapproval.

2)   This notification should not be considered a notification of compliance with or differences from
     Annex 14, Volume I. Separate notifications on this are necessary. (See Attachment C.)

3)   Please use extra sheets as required.


                                            ————————
                          ATTACHMENT C to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


                 NOTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH OR DIFFERENCES
                                  FROM ANNEX 14, VOLUME I
                  (Including all amendments up to and including Amendment 18)


To: The Secretary General
    International Civil Aviation Organization
    999 Robert-Bourassa Boulevard
    Montréal, Quebec
    Canada H3C 5H7


1.      No differences will exist on _____________________________ between the national regulations
and/or practices of (State) _____________________________________ and the provisions of Annex 14,
Volume I, including all amendments up to and including Amendment 18.

2.      The following differences will exist on _____________________________ between the
regulations and/or practices of (State) ______________________________________ and the provisions
of Annex 14, Volume I, including Amendment 18 (Please see Note 2) below.)

  a)   Annex Provision               b)   Details of Difference             c)   Remarks
       (Please give exact                 (Please describe the difference        (Please indicate reasons
       paragraph reference)               clearly and concisely)                 for the difference)




          (Please use extra sheets as required.)
                                                         C-2

3.     By the dates indicated below, (State) __________________________________ will have
complied with the provisions of Annex 14, Volume I, including all amendments up to and including
Amendment 18 for which differences have been notified in 2 above.

     a)       Annex Provision              b)     Date                              c)   Comments
              (Please give exact
              paragraph reference)

                                          (Please use extra sheets as required.)




Signature ________________________________________                                 Date ____________________


NOTES

1)        If paragraph 1 above is applicable to your State, please complete paragraph 1 and return this form to
          ICAO Headquarters. If paragraph 2 is applicable to you, please complete paragraphs 2 and 3 and return
          the form to ICAO Headquarters.

2)        A detailed repetition of previously notified differences, if they continue to apply, may be avoided by
          stating the current validity of such differences.

3)        Guidance on the notification of differences is provided in the Note on the Notification of Differences
          and in the Manual on Notification and Publication of Differences (Doc 10055).

4)        Please send a copy of this notification to the ICAO Regional Office accredited to your Government.


                                                ————————
                          ATTACHMENT D to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


                      NOTE ON THE NOTIFICATION OF DIFFERENCES
                  (Prepared and issued in accordance with instructions of the Council)


1.      Introduction

1.1              Article 38 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation (“Convention”) requires that
a Contracting State notify ICAO any time it does not comply with a Standard in all respects, it does not
bring its regulations or practices into full accord with any Standard, or it adopts regulations or practices
differing in any particular respect from the Standard.

1.2              The Assembly and the Council, when reviewing the notification of differences by
Contracting States in compliance with Article 38 of the Convention, have repeatedly noted that the
timeliness and currency of such notifications is not entirely satisfactory. Therefore, this note is issued to
reiterate the primary purpose of Article 38 of the Convention and to facilitate the determination and
notification of differences.

1.3              The primary purpose of the notification of differences is to promote safety, regularity and
efficiency in air navigation by ensuring that governmental and other agencies, including operators and
service providers, concerned with international civil aviation are made aware of all national regulations and
practices in so far as they differ from those prescribed in the Standards contained in Annexes to the
Convention.

1.4             Contracting States are, therefore, requested to give particular attention to the notification
of differences with respect to Standards in all Annexes, as described in paragraph 4 b) 1) of the Resolution
of Adoption.

1.5            Although differences from Recommended Practices are not notifiable under Article 38 of
the Convention, the Assembly has urged Contracting States to extend the above considerations to
Recommended Practices contained in Annexes to the Convention, as well.

2.      Notification of differences from Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs)

2.1              Guidance to Contracting States in the notification of differences to Standards and
Recommended Practices (SARPs) can only be given in very general terms. Contracting States are further
reminded that compliance with SARPs generally extends beyond the issuance of national regulations and
requires establishment of practical arrangements for implementation, such as the provision of facilities,
personnel and equipment and effective enforcement mechanisms. Contracting States should take those
elements into account when determining their compliance and differences. The following categories of
differences are provided as a guide in determining whether a notifiable difference exists:

                a) A Contracting State’s requirement is more exacting or exceeds a SARP
                   (Category A). This category applies when the national regulation and practices are
                   more demanding than the corresponding SARP, or impose an obligation within the
                   scope of the Annex which is not covered by the SARP. This is of particular importance
                   where a Contracting State requires a higher standard which affects the operation of
                   aircraft of other Contracting States in and above its territory;
                                                             D-2

                   b) A Contracting State’s requirement is different in character or the Contracting State
                      has established other means of compliance (Category B)*. This category applies, in
                      particular, when the national regulation and practices are different in character from
                      the corresponding SARP, or when the national regulation and practices differ in
                      principle, type or system from the corresponding SARP, without necessarily imposing
                      an additional obligation; and

                   c) A Contracting State’s requirement is less protective, partially implemented or not
                      implemented (Category C). This category applies when the national regulation and
                      practices are less protective than the corresponding SARP; when no national regulation
                      has been promulgated to address the corresponding SARP, in whole or in part; or when
                      the Contracting State has not brought its practices into full accord with the
                      corresponding SARP.

These categories do not apply to Not Applicable SARP. Please see the paragraph below.

2.2               Not Applicable SARP. When a Contracting State deems a SARP concerning aircraft,
operations, equipment, personnel, or air navigation facilities or services to be not applicable to the existing
aviation activities of the State, notification of a difference is not required. For example, a Contracting State
that is not a State of Design or Manufacture and that does not have any national regulations on the subject,
would not be required to notify differences from Annex 8 provisions related to the design and construction
of an aircraft.

2.3              Differences from appendices, tables and figures. The material comprising a SARP
includes not only the SARP itself, but also the appendices, tables and figures associated with the SARP.
Therefore, differences from appendices, tables and figures are notifiable under Article 38. In order to file a
difference against an appendix, table or figure, States should file a difference against the SARP that makes
reference to the appendix, table or figure.

2.4               Differences from definitions. Contracting States should notify differences from
definitions. The definition of a term used in a SARP does not have independent status but is an essential
part of each SARP in which the term is used. Therefore, a difference from the definition of the term may
result in there being a difference from any SARP in which the term is used. To this end, Contracting States
should take into consideration differences from definitions when determining compliance or differences to
SARPs in which the terms are used.

2.5              The notification of differences should be not only to the latest amendment but to the whole
Annex, including the amendment. In other words, Contracting States that have already notified differences
are requested to provide regular updates of the differences previously notified until the difference no longer
exists.

2.6              Further guidance on the identification and notification of differences, examples of
well-defined differences and examples of model processes and procedures for management of the
notification of differences can be found in the Manual on Notification and Publication of Differences
(Doc 10055).


 The expression “different in character or other means of compliance” in b) would be applied to a national regulation and practice

which achieve, by other means, the same objective as that of the corresponding SARPs or for other substantive reasons so cannot be
classified under a) or c).
                                                                  D-3

3.        Form of notification of differences

3.1                 Differences can be notified:

                   a)    by sending to ICAO Headquarters a form on notification of compliance or differences;
                         or

                    b)   through the Electronic Filing of Differences (EFOD) System at www.icao.int/usoap.

3.2                 When notifying differences, the following information should be provided:

                    a) the number of the paragraph or subparagraph which contains the SARP to which the
                       difference relates*;

                    b) the reasons why the State does not comply with the SARP, or considers it necessary to
                       adopt different regulations or practices;

                    c) a clear and concise description of the difference; and

                    d) intentions for future compliance and any date by which your Government plans to
                       confirm compliance with and remove its difference from the SARP for which the
                       difference has been notified.

3.3              The differences notified will be made available to other Contracting States, normally in the
terms used by the Contracting State when making the notification. In the interest of making the information
as useful as possible, Contracting States are requested to ensure that:

                   a)    statements be as clear and concise as possible and be confined to essential points;

                   b)    the provision of extracts from national regulations not be considered as sufficient to
                         satisfy the obligation to notify differences; and

                   c)    general comments, unclear acronyms and references be avoided.



                                                  ————————




 This applies only when the notification is made under 3.1 a).
                      ATTACHMENT E to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


       IMPLEMENTATION TASK LIST AND OUTLINE OF GUIDANCE MATERIAL
             IN RELATION TO AMENDMENT 18 TO ANNEX 14 VOLUME I



1.     IMPLEMENTATION TASK LIST

1.1         Essential steps to be followed by a State to implement the Amendment 18 to Annex 14,
Volume I:

            a) identify the rule-making process necessary to transpose the new ICAO provisions into
               national regulations;

            b) conduct a gap analysis between the new ICAO provisions and national framework;

            c) draft the necessary modifications to the national regulations;

            d) officially adopt the national regulations and means of compliance;

            e) notification of differences, if any, to ICAO;

            f) implement the new national regulations by the industry stakeholders;

            g) modify the oversight framework according to the new national regulations;

            h) oversight by the State of the implementation of regulations; and

            i)   publish significant differences, if any, in the State’s AIP.


2.     STANDARDIZATION PROCESS

2.1         Effective date: 4 August 2025

2.2         Applicability dates:

            a) 27 November 2025 for provisions related to aerodrome design, visual aids and apron
               management service;

            b) 26 November 2026 for provisions related to ground handling; and

            c) 21 November 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation surfaces.

2.3         Embedded date(s): N/A
                                                   E-2

3.      SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION

3.1     ICAO documentation

          Title, Doc no.                       Type                           Planned publication
                                               (PANS/TI/Manual/Circ.)         date
          Procedures for Air Navigation        PANS                           November 2025
          Services (PANS) — Aerodromes
          (Doc 9981)
          Procedures for Air Navigation
          Services — Aircraft Operations,
          Procedures for Air Navigation
          Services — Aircraft Operations,      PANS                            Published
          Volume II — Construction of
          Visual and Instrument Flight
          Procedures (Doc 8168)
          Airport Services Manual, Part 6
          — Control of Obstacles               Manual                         July 2025
          (Doc 9137)
          Aerodrome Design Manual, Part 1
          — Runways and Part 2 — Taxiways,
          Aprons     and    Holding     Bays   Manual                         July 2025
          (Doc 9157)
          Aerodrome Design Manual, Part 4 –
          Visual Aids (Doc 9157)               Manual                         July 2025
          Airport Planning Manual, Part 1 —
          Master Planning (Doc 9184)           Manual                         Published
          Manual on Ground Handling
          (Doc 10121)                          Manual                         Published

3.2     External documentation

                             Title                       External Organization        Publication date
          None


4.      IMPLEMENTATION ASSISTANCE TASKS

                     Type                       Global                      Regional
          Promote awareness and roll-out                  Workshops, training courses, webinars


5.     UNIVERSAL SAFETY OVERSIGHT AUDIT PROGRAMME (USOAP)

5.1            Certain Protocol Questions (PQs) relating to OLS, visual aids and ground handling should
be reviewed and modified as necessary to assess the effective implementation by States. Existing PQs may
need to be amended or new PQs may be required. This will be assessed during the next amendment cycle
of the PQs.


                                         ————————
                           ATTACHMENT F to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


                              IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN RELATION TO
                             AMENDMENT 18 TO ANNEX 14, VOLUME I


1.      INTRODUCTION

1.1             Amendment 18 to Annex 14, Volume I introduces elements concerning runway strip width
for code number 3 runways and erases the geometric discrepancy in the widths of runway strips between
the various code numbers for non-instrument (NINST) runways. The amendment will provide better
situational awareness to pilots through enhanced visual aids, indicating the remaining runway distance,
temporary runway closures and any other changes to the movement area at an operational aerodrome. The
amendment related to visual aids will also enhance the provision of runway threshold markings and address
the harmonization of aerodrome lighting requirements for CAT II operations.

1.2              This amendment will ensure that States regularly assess the impact of ground handling
operations on aviation safety, forming a significant and critical part of the aviation industry and for which
oversight activities are initiated based on the assessment. Finally, it will ensure that a holistic safeguarding
of the airspace against obstacles is provided through a set (or sets) of surfaces with clear purposes and
characteristics that are performance based and are adaptable to the type of operations conducted at the
aerodrome.

2.      IMPACT ASSESSMENT

2.1     Amendment concerning aerodrome design

2.1.1          Safety impact: Positive. The amendment will clarify the required runway strip width for
Code 3 runways and will erase the geometric discrepancy between the widths of runway strips in case of
NINST runways. It allows some Code 2 aerodromes, which are not able to provide the runway strip width
of 75 m on each side, to meet the overall higher safety criteria for a NINST Code 3 environment.

2.1.2           Financial impact: None. For aerodrome design, it will allow some Code 2 aerodromes, to
meet the overall higher safety criteria for a NINST runway Code 3 environment.

2.1.3            Security impact: No security impact is envisaged with the implementation of this
amendment.

2.1.4          Environmental impact: No environmental impact is envisaged with the implementation of
this amendment.

2.1.5           Efficiency impact: Positive. For aerodrome design it will allow some Code 2 aerodromes,
to meet the overall higher safety criteria for a NINST runway Code 3 environment.

2.1.6            Expected implementation time: 1 to 2 years. The amendment will allow some Code 2
aerodromes, to meet the overall higher safety criteria for a NINST runway Code 3 environment. Code 3
aerodromes that currently provide a 75 m half strip width will still be in compliance with the new provision
since the required values are minimum values.
                                                       F-2

2.2     Amendment concerning visual aids

2.2.1              Safety impact: Positive. For visual aids, the amendment will help improve aerodrome
safety through a coherent applicability of the basic patterns of runway markings and by harmonizing
aerodrome lighting requirements for CAT II operations, as well as by enhancing situational awareness for
pilots in all visibility conditions, etc.

2.2.2             Financial impact: For visual aids, the financial impact varies as the changes can, when
adopted, reduce the workload for authorities. The ambiguity of aerodrome visual aid requirements,
particularly for taxiway centre line lighting for CAT II operations, will be resolved. This resolution will
result in significant cost saving for airports, as installation of additional lights at 15 m spacing will no longer
be mandated without a supporting operational requirement. In other instances, some costs are expected if
the installation of runway distance remaining signs is chosen at an aerodrome. However, for aerodrome
operators with CAT I runways that are considering the installation of runway centre line lights as a runway
excursion preventive measure, runway distance remaining signs would be a more economical and effective
alternative.

2.2.3            Security impact: No security impact is envisaged with the implementation of this
amendment.

2.2.4          Environmental impact: Positive. The environmental impact is positive since the
amendment to runway distance remaining signs would help reduce runway occupancy time (ROT) and
consequently would contribute to reducing fuel consumption and aircraft emissions.

2.2.5         Efficiency impact: Positive. Runway distance remaining signs (RDRS) would help reduce
runway occupancy time (ROT) and consequently help improve airport capacity.

2.2.6            Expected implementation time: For visual aids, the implementation time can vary between
1 to 2 years. This depends on whether aerodromes are already compliant or if they must apply the missing
threshold markings as an element of the basic patterns of runway markings. Some aerodrome operators may
require this time to install runway distance remaining signs.

2.3     Amendment concerning ground handling and apron management service

2.3.1           Safety impact: Positive. The amendment encourages States to regularly assess the impact
of their ground handling operations on aviation safety, thereby accumulating safety performance
information and allowing them to identify and mitigate trends that may lead to safety concerns.

2.3.2          The amendment further provides SARPs containing essential safety requirements to
safeguard the movement of aircraft and the safety of turnaround operations.

2.3.3            Financial impact: Increase in overall cost. When these amendments are incorporated into
the national regulations, additional oversight functions may be required by States. However, these are basic
provisions on ground handling, and States will have the flexibility to structure and integrate them into
existing oversight activities, keeping costs and/or additional resources to a minimum. States that currently
oversee ground-handling activities through aircraft operators or aerodrome operators may not need to adjust
their oversight models.

2.3.4            Security impact: No security impact is envisaged with the implementation of this
amendment.
                                                     F-3

2.3.5          Environmental impact: Positive. Improvements in safety and efficiency will eventually
bring environmental benefits.

2.3.6            Efficiency impact: Positive. With a globally standardized set of ground handling
procedures, ground delays related to aircraft turnaround will be reduced, hence improving the overall
efficiency of the system.

2.3.7           Expected implementation time: 1 to 2 years. For States, this depends on the frequency and
robustness of their rule-making process. Upon transposing the changes into national regulations, certain
parts of the amendment can be implemented with immediate effect; others may require between 1 to 2
years. Since some of the amendments are basic provisions, the impact is negligible on existing ground
handling operations, which are being carried out in accordance with current industry best practices.

2.4     Amendment concerning obstacle limitation surfaces (OLS)

2.4.1           Safety impact: Positive. The surfaces provide a holistic safeguarding of the airspace against
obstacles. Since the establishment of obstacle limitation surfaces (OLS) which comprise the obstacle free
surface (OFS) and the obstacle evaluation surface (OES), the entire airspace is protected to ensure no
obstacles will be left unnoticed or unaccounted for. The OFS will be steeper and for some, it will be
narrower and shorter. However, there will be additional surfaces, the OES, which extends below and
beyond the OFS. Therefore, the entire airspace of concern to operations will be covered by one surface or
the other.

2.4.2           Financial impact: Depending on the State and their existing practices, there may be a need
to invest in additional resources (human and technological) to help States transition to this new
methodology of airspace safeguarding. However, these costs can be minimized by adapting certain
prescribed surfaces. States will have guidance material to help them implement the change.

2.4.3            For industry, the existing OLS may not reflect the type of operations conducted at the
aerodrome. Adjustments may be made to the surfaces or selection of the surfaces based on the new
Aeroplane Design Group (ADG) categorization. In this case, the aerodrome may impose a more stringent
template compared with the existing. As there is no impact to runway holding positions and taxiway to
runway separation requirements, none of the aerodrome’s existing physical infrastructures will be affected.
However, due to the more stringent height limit requirements, there could be buildings or structures that
will penetrate the new surfaces and should be assessed. For such aerodromes, a survey should be initiated
prior to the implementation of the new surfaces. However, the number of such occurrence is extremely rare
as only few aeroplanes will cause the aerodromes having to adopt a higher ADG category for example from
Code number 1 to ADG IIA or higher, or from Code number 2 to ADG IIC or higher.

2.4.4            Security impact: No security impact is envisaged with the implementation of this
amendment.

2.4.5          Environmental impact: Positive. With aerodromes being more accessible, the likelihood of
a go-around or missed approach due to obstacles will be greatly reduced. More efficient landings and
departures reduce unnecessary fuel burn, since extra fuel is consumed during a missed approach and
subsequent approach manoeuvres.

2.4.6              Efficiency impact: Positive. Increased accessibility to the runway reduces the likelihood of
go-around procedures due to obstacles. This may contribute to increased runway throughput and more
efficient traffic flow at the aerodrome.
                                                     F-4

2.4.7           Current OLS are prescriptive. In the amendment, States know the surfaces needed to
support the type of operations conducted at the aerodrome. Surfaces that are not required need not be
safeguarded and areas which would otherwise be affected by the surfaces can then be released for
development. This is an efficient way of ensuring a good balance between aviation and land use needs
without compromising aviation safety.

2.4.8           Expected implementation time: For States, 3 to 4 years. While transposing the new
provisions into national regulations may require between 1 to 2 years, establishing the new surfaces and
incorporating amendments to zoning laws may take an additional 1 to 2 years. The industry may need 1 to
2 years to implement the surfaces and to acquire additional resources for the conduct of aeronautical studies,
where required.




                                          ————————
                                              ATTACHMENT G to State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23


                                               OVERVIEW OF APPROVAL PROCESS FOR
                                               AMENDMENT 18 TO ANNEX 14, VOLUME I


                                                       Preliminary                                                              Adopted
                                                                       State letter    Final review    No. of replies           Effective
Amendment concerning              Source(s)             review by
                                                                        and date       by the ANC      at final review         Applicable
                                                        the ANC
Aerodrome design, visual    Fourth meeting of the   23 March 2023    AN 4/1.1.58-     26 March 2024,   73 Contracting
                                                                                                                           28 March 2025
aids; ground handling;      Aerodrome Design and    (ANC 222-7)      23/33            28 March 2024    States
                                                                                                                           4 August 2025
apron management service;   Operations Panel                         30 May 2023      (ANC 225-10,     7 international
                                                                                                                           27 November 2025
and obstacle limitation     (ADOP/4)                                 Corr. No.1       ANC 225-13)      organizations
                                                                                                                             26 November 2026
surfaces                                                                                               Total: 80 replies
                                                                                                                             21 November 2030




                                                                 — END —
                             AMENDMENT 18

                                  TO THE




                  INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
                 AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES




                      AERODROMES


                                 ANNEX 14

TO THE CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION


                       VOLUME I
            AERODROME DESIGN AND OPERATIONS




The amendment to Annex 14, Volume I, contained in this document was adopted
by the Council of ICAO on 28 March 2025. Such parts of this amendment as have
not been disapproved by more than half of the total number of Contracting States
on or before 4 August 2025 will become effective on that date and will become
applicable on 27 November 2025 for provisions related to aerodrome design,
visual aids and apron management service; 26 November 2026 for provisions
related to ground handling; and 21 November 2030 for provisions related to
obstacle limitation surface, as specified in the Resolution of Adoption.
(State letter AN 4/1.2.31-25/23 refers.)




                               MARCH 2025



      INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION
                         AMENDMENT 18 TO THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
                                AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

                                     ANNEX 14 — AERODROMES
                           VOLUME I — AERODROME DESIGN AND OPERATIONS

                                             RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION


The Council

Acting in accordance with the Convention on International Civil Aviation, and particularly with the provisions
of Articles 37, 54 and 90 thereof,

1.              Hereby adopts on 28 March 2025 Amendment 18 to the International Standards and
Recommended Practices contained in the document entitled International Standards and Recommended
Practices, Aerodromes, Volume I — Aerodrome Design and Operations which for convenience is designated
Annex 14, Volume I to the Convention;

2.              Prescribes 4 August 2025 as the date upon which the said amendment shall become effective,
except for any part thereof in respect of which a majority of the Contracting States have registered their
disapproval with the Council before that date;

3.              Resolves that the said amendment or such parts thereof as have become effective shall become
applicable on 27 November 20251;

4.                  Requests the Secretary General:

                    a) to notify each Contracting State immediately of the above action and immediately after
                       4 August 2025 of those parts of the amendment which have become effective;

                    b) to request each Contracting State:

                         1) to notify the Organization (in accordance with the obligation imposed by Article 38
                            of the Convention) of the differences that will exist on 27 November 20251 between
                            its national regulations or practices and the provisions of the Standards in the Annex
                            as hereby amended, such notification to be made before 27 October 20252, and
                            thereafter to notify the Organization of any further differences that arise;

                         2) to notify the Organization before 27 October 20252 of the date or dates by which it
                            will have complied with the provisions of the Standards in the Annex as hereby
                            amended;

                    c) to invite each Contracting State to notify additionally any differences between its own
                       practices and those established by the Recommended Practices following the procedure
                       specified in subparagraph b) above with respect to differences from Standards.

                                                    ————————


1 26 November 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 November 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation

 surfaces.
2 26 October 2026 for provisions related to ground handling and 21 October 2030 for provisions related to obstacle limitation surfaces.
                             NOTES ON THE PRESENTATION OF THE
                             AMENDMENT TO ANNEX 14, VOLUME I


      The text of the amendment is arranged to show deleted text with a line through it and new text
highlighted with grey shading, as shown below:


    Text to be deleted is shown with a line through it.              text to be deleted
    New text to be inserted is highlighted with grey shading.        new text to be inserted
    Text to be deleted is shown with a line through it followed by   new text to replace existing text
    the replacement text which is highlighted with grey shading.
                                                      TEXT OF AMENDMENT 18

                                                                        TO THE

                                              INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
                                             AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

                                                                 AERODROMES

                                                                      ANNEX 14

                    TO THE CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION

                        VOLUME I — AERODROME DESIGN AND OPERATIONS

...



                                                                     CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                                                Page
...

      CHAPTER 4.          Obstacle restriction and removal .............................................................................. 4-x

             4.1       General .................................................................................................................................... 4-x
             4.2       Obstacle free surfaces (OFS) ................................................................................................... 4-x
             4.3       Obstacle evaluation surfaces (OES) ........................................................................................ 4-x
             4.4       Obstacle limitation requirements .............................................................................................. 4-x
             4.5       Obstacle limitation surfaces requirements ................................................................................ 4-x
             4.6       Objects outside the obstacle free surfaces and obstacle evaluation surfaces ............................ 4-x
...

      CHAPTER 5.          Visual aids for navigation .....................................................................................                         5-1

      ...

             5.4      Signs .......................................................................................................................... 5-83

             ...

                       5.4.7       Road-holding position sign .......................................................................... 5-93
                       5.4.8       Runway distance remaining signs ............................................................... 5-xx

...

ATTACHMENT A. Guidance material supplementary to Annex 14, Volume I                                                                                    ATT A-1

...
            23.    Runway distance remaining signs (RDRSs)                                                                                             ATT A-x

...
2

                               ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS

                                      (used in Annex 14, Volume I)


Abbreviations

ADG        Aeroplane design group

...
GBAS       Ground-based augmentation system
GHSP       Ground handling service provider
GSE        Ground support equipment

...

OES        Obstacle evaluation surfaces
...

OFS        Obstacle free surfaces

...

RDRS        Runway distance remaining sign
...

SBAS        Satellite-based augmentation system
...


ULD        Unit load device

...

Vat        Indicated airspeed at threshold
Vso        Stalling speed or the minimum steady flight speed in the landing configuration
Vs1g       Stalling speed or the minimum steady flight speed in a specified configuration

...

                        LIMITED INDEX OF SIGNIFICANT SUBJECTS
                            INCLUDED IN ANNEX 14, VOLUME I

...

RUNWAY

...

       distance remaining signs x.x
...
                                                                                                             3

                                    INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
                                 AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

                                       CHAPTER 1.         GENERAL
...

                                               1.1   Definitions

...

    Ground handling. Services necessary for an aircraft’s arrival at, and departure from, an airport, other
than air traffic services.

...

                                      1.8   Aeroplane Design Group

                                    (Applicable as of 21 November 2030)

     Note.— The intent of the Aeroplane Design Group (ADG) is to provide a method for interrelating the
specifications for the management of obstacles around aerodromes. The ADG utilizes two criteria related
to the aeroplane performance characteristics and dimensions. The first criterion is based on the indicated
airspeed of the aircraft at threshold and the second criterion on the aeroplane wingspan.

      See Chapter 4 on the application of ADG for the provisions of obstacle restriction and removal.

     1.8.1 An ADG shall be determined for each runway in accordance with the characteristics of the
critical aeroplane for which the runway is intended.

    1.8.2 The ADG shall be determined from Table 1-2, by selecting the ADG corresponding to the
highest values of indicated airspeed at threshold and wingspan of the aeroplanes for which the runway is
intended.

    Note.— Indicated airspeed at threshold (Vat) is equal to the stall speed Vso multiplied by 1.3, or stall
speed Vs1g multiplied by 1.23 in the landing configuration at the maximum certificated landing mass. If
both Vso and Vs1g are available, the higher resulting Vat applies.

                                  Table 1-2.    Aeroplane Design Group
                                                 (see 1.8.2)

                                    (Applicable as of 21 November 2030)

      Aeroplane Design
                           Indicated airspeed at threshold                          Wingspan
          Group
             I                 Less than 169 km/h (91 kt)          and     Up to but not including 24 m
            IIA                Less than 169 km/h (91 kt)          and   24 m up to but not including 36 m
                             169 km/h (91 kt) up to but not
            IIB                                                    and     Up to but not including 36 m
                              including 224 km/h (121 kt)
                            224 km/h (121 kt) up to but not
            IIC                                                    and     Up to but not including 36 m
                              including 307 km/h (166 kt)
             III              Less than 307 km/h (166 kt)          and   36 m up to but not including 52 m
4

             IV              Less than 307 km/h (166 kt)        and    52 m up to but not including 65 m
              V              Less than 307 km/h (166 kt)        and    65 m up to but not including 80 m

     Note 1.— Detailed specifications concerning the application of the aeroplane design group are given
in the Airport Services Manual, Part 6 — Control of Obstacles (Doc 9137).

      Note 2.— The following examples illustrate how the ADG is determined.

    Example 1.— If the critical aeroplane that the runway is intended to serve has an indicated airspeed at
threshold of 161 km/h (87 kt) and a wingspan of 20 m, then the aeroplane design group would be I.

    Example 2.— If the critical aeroplane that the runway is intended to serve has an indicated airspeed at
threshold of 224 km/h (121 kt) and a wingspan of 52 m, then the aeroplane design group would be IV.


                          CHAPTER 3.        PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
...

                                             3.4 Runway strips
...

Width of runway strips

...

     3.4.5 Recommendation.— A strip including a non-instrument runway should extend on each side of
the centre line of the runway and its extended centre line throughout the length of the strip, to a distance of
at least:

      — 75 m where the code number is 3 or 4;

    —    55 m where the code number is 3;

      — 40 m where the code number is 2; and

      — 30 m where the code number is 1.

...

Grading of runway strips

...
     3.4.9   Recommendation.— That portion of a strip of a non-instrument runway within a distance of
at least:

      — 75 m where the code number is3 or 4;

    —    55 m where the code number is 3;

      — 40 m where the code number is 2; and

      — 30 m where the code number is 1;

from the centre line of the runway and its extended centre line should provide a graded area for aeroplanes
which the runway is intended to serve in the event of an aeroplane running off the runway.
                                                                                                          5

...

Strength of runway strips

...

    3.4.18 Recommendation.— That portion of a strip containing a non-instrument runway within a
distance of at least:

      — 75 m where the code number is3 or 4;

   —        55 m where the code number is 3;

      — 40 m where the code number is 2; and

      — 30 m where the code number is 1;

from the centre line of the runway and its extended centre line should be so prepared or constructed as to
minimize hazards arising from differences in load-bearing capacity to aeroplanes which the runway is
intended to serve in the event of an aeroplane running off the runway.

...
                               Table 3-1.   Taxiway minimum separation distances

                     Distance between taxiway centre line                 Taxiway,
                       and runway centre line (metres)                      other    Aircraft
                                                                 Taxiway than         stand
                                             Non-instrument      centre    aircraft taxilane     Aircraft
                Instrument runways              runways          line       stand centre line     stand
                   Code number                Code number        to       taxilane, to aircraft taxilane
                                                                 taxiway centre       stand     centre line
                                                                 centre    line to taxilane to object
 Code                                                            line      object centre line (meters)
 letter          1    2    3      4          1   2   3      4    (metres) (metres) (metres)
      (1)       (2) (3) (4)      (5)        (6) (7) (8)   (9)    (10)     (11)         (12)        (13)
      A                    –      –         37.547.5 –      –    23       15.5         19.5         12
                77.577.5
      B          82 82 152        –         42 52 87 67 –        32       20           28.5        16.5
      C          88 88 158 158              48 58 93 73 93       44       26           40.5        22.5
      D          –    –    166 166           –   – 101 101       63       37           59.5        33.5
                                                    81
      E          –    – 172.5172.5           –   – 107.5107.5    76       43.5         72.5         40
                                                    87.5
      F          –    –    180 180           –   – 115 115       91       51           87.5        47.5
                                                    95
...
6

                                         3.11   Taxiway strips
...

Grading of taxiway strips

         3.11.4 Recommendation.— The centre portion of a taxiway strip should provide a graded area
to a distance from the centre line of the taxiway of not less than that given by the following tabulation:

        — 10.25 m where the OMGWS is up to but not including 4.5 m;

        — 11 m where the OMGWS is 4.5 m up to but not including 6 m;

        — 12.50 m where the OMGWS is 6 m up to but not including 9 m;

        — 18.50 17 m where the OMGWS is 9 m up to but not including 15 m, where the code letter is D;

        — 19 m where the OMGWS is 9 m up to but not including 15 m, where the code letter is E;

        — 22 m where the OMGWS is 9 m up to but not including 15 m, where the code letter is F.

       Note.— Guidance on width of the graded portion of a taxiway is given in the Aerodrome Design
Manual (Doc 9157), Part 2.

...


                           3.12 Holding bays, runway-holding positions,
                      intermediate holding positions and road-holding positions
...


                      Table 3-2. Minimum distance from the runway centre line
                  to a holding bay, runway-holding position or road-holding position


                                                                Code number
Type of runway                            1                 2                 3                 4
Non-instrument                          30 m              40 m           75m 55 m             75 m
Non-precision approach                  40 m              40 m              75 m              75 m
Precision approach category I          60 mb             60 mb             90 ma,b           90 ma,b
Precision approach categories II
and III                                  —                 —               90 ma,b           90 ma,b
Take-off runway                         30 m              40 m           75m 55 m             75 m
...
                                                                                                              7

Location

...

    3.12.9 Until 20 November 2030, Tthe location of a runway-holding position established in
accordance with 3.12.3 shall be such that a holding aircraft or vehicle will not infringe the obstacle free
zone, approach surface, take-off climb surface or ILS/MLS critical/sensitive area or interfere with the
operation of radio navigation aids.

     3.12.9 As of 21 November 2030, the location of a runway-holding position established in accordance
with 3.12.3 shall be such that a holding aircraft or vehicle will not infringe the inner approach surface, inner
transitional surfaces, balked landing surface, approach surface, take-off climb surface or ILS/MLS
critical/sensitive area or interfere with the operation of other radio navigation aids.


                                                 3.13   Aprons

General

     3.13.1 Recommendation.— Aprons should be provided where necessary to permit the on- and
off-loading of passengers, cargo or mail as well as the servicing of aircraft without interfering with the
aerodrome traffic.

   3.13.2 Recommendation.—The design of aprons should take into consideration criteria for safe
ground handling, including:

      a) sufficient space between aircraft stands to enable personnel and equipment to move safely and
         efficiently;

      b) adequate apron markings, apron signs and apron floodlighting;

      c) adequate staging and storage areas for ground support equipment (GSE);

      d) positioning of fixed ground services;

      e) storage areas for unit load devices (ULD);

      f)   adequate access and egress routes for fuel, GSE and emergency vehicles;

      g) clearly delineated and visible access and egress routes for passengers;

      h) new technologies (electric charging points, autonomous vehicles, etc.);

      i)   avoidance of rear of aircraft stand service roads wherever practicable; and

      j)   appropriate protection for persons, equipment and infrastructure from jet blast and propeller wash.

   Note.— Further guidance on apron design and markings is given in the Aerodrome Design Manual
(Doc 9157), Part 4 — Visual Aids, and the Airport Planning Manual (Doc 9184), Part 1— Master Planning.
8

Size of aprons

   3.13.23 Recommendation.— The total apron area should be adequate to permit safe and expeditious
handling of the aerodrome traffic at its maximum anticipated density.

Strength of aprons

    3.13.34 Recommendation.— Each part of an apron should be capable of withstanding the traffic of
the aircraft it is intended to serve, due consideration being given to the fact that some portions of the apron
will be subjected to a higher density of traffic and, as a result of slow moving or stationary aircraft, to
higher stresses than a runway.

Slopes on aprons

    3.13.45 Recommendation.— Slopes on an apron, including those on an aircraft stand taxilane,
should be sufficient to prevent accumulation of water on the surface of the apron but should be kept as level
as drainage requirements permit.

      3.13.56   Recommendation.— On an aircraft stand the maximum slope should not exceed 1 per cent.

Clearance distances on aircraft stands

    3.13.67 Recommendation.— An aircraft stand should provide the following minimum clearances
between an aircraft entering or exiting the stand and any adjacent building, aircraft on another stand and
other objects:

      Code letter    Clearance

          A             3m
          B             3m
          C            4.5 m
          D            7.5 m
          E            7.5 m
          F            7.5 m

   When special circumstances so warrant, these clearances may be reduced at a nose-in aircraft stand,
where the code letter is D, E or F:

      a) between the terminal, including any fixed passenger boarding bridge, and the nose of an aircraft;
         and

      b) over any portion of the stand provided with azimuth guidance by a visual docking guidance system.

...



                    CHAPTER 4.       OBSTACLE RESTRICTION AND REMOVAL

                                    (Applicable until 20 November 2030)


...
                                                                                                   9

        Table 4-1.   Dimensions and slopes of obstacle limitation surfaces — Approach runways

                                        APPROACH RUNWAYS

                                                    RUNWAY CLASSIFICATION
                                                                          Precision approach
                                                                                category
                                Non-instrument           Non-precision        I         II or III
                                 Code number               approach     Code number Code
                                                         Code number                    number
     Surface and          1        2     3        4    1,2    3       4  1,2     3,4       3,4
     dimensionsa
         (1)              (2)     (3)    (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)   (8)     (9)   (10)    (11)

CONICAL
Slope                     5%      5%     5%   5%         5%     5%   5%       5%   5%       5%
Height                   35 m    55 m   75 m 100 m      60 m   75 m 100 m    60 m 100 m    100 m

INNER
HORIZONTAL
Height                  45 m 45 m 45 m 45 m             45 m 45 m 45 m       45 m 45 m     45 m
Radius                  2 000 2 500 4 000 4 000         3 500 4 000 4 000    3 500 4 000 4 000 m
                          m     m     m     m             m     m     m        m     m
INNER APPROACH
Width                     —       —      —       —       —      —      —     90 m 120 me 120 me
Distance    from          —       —      —       —       —      —      —     60 m 60 m    60 m
threshold
Length                    —       —      —       —       —      —      —     900 m 900 m   900 m
Slope                                                                        2.5% 2%        2%

APPROACH
Length of inner edge     60 m    80 m      150 m        140 m 280 m 280 m    140 m 280 m   280 m
                                       150
                                      110m
Distance         from 30 m       60 m 60 m 60 m         60 m   60 m   60 m   60 m   60 m   60 m
threshold
Divergence (each side) 10%       10%    10%      10%     15%   15%    15%     15%   15%     15%

First section
Length                  1 600 2 500 3 000 3 000         2 500 3 000 3 000    3 000 3 000 3 000 m
                          m     m     m     m             m     m     m        m     m
Slope                    5%    4% 3.33% 2.5%            3.33% 2%     2%      2.5% 2%       2%

Second section
Length                    —       —      —       —       —     3 600 3 600   12 000 3 600 3 600 mb
                                                                mb    mb       m     mb
Slope                     —       —      —       —       —     2.5% 2.5%      3% 2.5% 2.5%
10

                                                    RUNWAY CLASSIFICATION

Horizontal section
Length                   —       —      —       —         —      8 400 8 400        —     8 400 8 400 mb
                                                                  mb     mb                mb
Total length             —       —      —       —         —     15 000 15 000     15 000 15 000 15 000 m
                                                                   m     m          m       m
TRANSITIONAL
Slope                    20%    20% 14.3% 14.3%          20% 14.3% 14.3%          14.3% 14.3% 14.3%

INNER
TRANSITIONAL
Slope                    —       —      —       —         —       —       —        40% 33.3% 33.3%

BALKED LANDING
SURFACE
Length of inner edge     —       —      —       —         —       —       —       90 m 120 me 120 me
Distance          from   —       —      —       —         —       —       —         c   1 800 1 800 md
threshold                                                                                md
Divergence (each side)   —       —      —       —         —       —       —       10% 10%       10%
Slope                    —       —      —       —         —       —       —        4% 3.33% 3.33%

...



                                        Insert new text as follows:


                     CHAPTER 4.     OBSTACLE RESTRICTION AND REMOVAL
                                  (Applicable as of 21 November 2030)

     Note 1.— This chapter describes the management of obstacles within the aerodrome boundary and in
its vicinity. The following specifications allow States to define the airspace around aerodromes to be
maintained free from obstacles and the airspace where flexibility can be applied in managing the obstacle
environment. This permits the existing and intended aeroplane operations at the aerodromes to be
conducted safely and prevent the aerodromes from becoming restricted and eventually unusable by the
growth of obstacles.

   This is achieved by establishing obstacle limitation surfaces (OLS) consisting of obstacle free surfaces
(OFS) and obstacle evaluation surfaces (OES).

    Note 2.— The lateral and vertical extent of the OLS are being used in defining the requirements for the
collection of terrain and obstacle data sets. Provisions on terrain and obstacle data sets are contained in
Annex 15 — Aeronautical Information Services, Chapter 5.

   Note 3.— The establishment of, and requirements for, an obstacle protection surface for visual
approach slope indicator systems are specified in Chapter 5, 5.3.5.41 to 5.3.5.45.
                                                                                                            11

                                                  4.1   General

   4.1.1 States shall establish a process to prevent the growth of obstacles, both fixed and mobile, that
may affect the safety or regularity of flight operations at an aerodrome.

   Note 1.— Specifications concerning the process to be established by the State are contained in
PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981), Part II, Chapter 10.

   Note 2.— Taxiing aircraft, aircraft on tow and traversing vehicles are considered mobile objects
whereas buildings, parked aircraft and vehicles are considered fixed objects.


                                    4.2   Obstacle free surfaces (OFS)

     Note.— The purpose of the obstacle free surfaces is to establish airspace that preserves the accessibility
of the aerodrome and the safety of operations by protecting aeroplanes during approaches and go-arounds.

                                          4.2.1    Approach surface

    Note1.— The purpose of the approach surface is to establish the airspace to be maintained free from
obstacles to protect an aeroplane in the visual phase of the approach-to-land manoeuvres following a
standard 3.0° approach. See Figure 4-1.

    4.2.1.1   Description. An inclined surface preceding the threshold.

    4.2.1.2   Characteristics. The limits of the approach surface shall comprise:

    a) an inner edge of specified length, horizontal and perpendicular to the extended centre line of the
       runway and located at a specified distance before the threshold;

    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified rate from
       the extended centre line of the runway; and

    c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge.

    4.2.1.3 The surface mentioned in 4.2.1.2 shall be varied when lateral offset, angular offset or curved
approaches are utilized; two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a
specified rate from the extended centre line of the lateral offset, angular offset or curved ground track.

    4.2.1.4   The elevation of the inner edge shall be equal to the elevation of the midpoint of the threshold.

    4.2.1.5   The slope of the approach surface shall be measured:

    a) when straight-in approaches are utilized — in the vertical plane containing the centre line of the
       runway and its extension; and

    b) when lateral offset, angular offset or curved approaches are utilized — along any straight part of
       the approach, in the vertical plane containing the centre line of the lateral offset, angular offset or
       curved ground track or, along any curved part of the approach, in the vertical plane tangent with
       the curved ground track.

    4.2.1.6 Except where the approach surface is raised to comply with approach angles greater than 3.0°,
the slope of the approach surface shall not be greater than, and their other dimensions not less than, those
specified in Table 4-1 for non-instrument runways and Table 4-2 for instrument runways.
12


    4.2.1.7 Recommendation.— The slope of the approach surface should not be increased to facilitate
the growth of obstacles.

    Note.— The slope of the approach surface is intended to adapt to approach operations that have a
slope higher than 3.0°. Specifications concerning the modification of the approach surface are contained
in PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981), Part II, Chapter 10.

    4.2.1.8   Where the approach angle is lower than 3.0°, the slope of the approach surface shall be
decreased.

     4.2.1.9 Where the slope of the obstacle protection surface of a visual approach slope indicator system
is lower than that indicated in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2, the slope of the approach surface shall be decreased
to match that of the obstacle protection surface.

     Note.— See Chapter 5, 5.3.5 on the obstacle protection surface.

     4.2.1.10 Where the slope of the approach surface is reduced, corresponding adjustment in the length
of the approach surface shall be made to provide protection to a height equal to that reached with the slopes
and lengths in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2.

    4.2.1.11 On instrument approach runways, where the obstacle clearance height is higher than 150 m
(500 ft) above the threshold, the length of the approach surface shall not be less than:

     a) the value indicated in Table 4-2; or

     b) that necessary to reach the obstacle clearance height;

whichever is greater.

         Table 4-1.     Dimensions and slopes of approach surface — Non-instrument runways

 Aeroplane design
                                 I          IIA-IIB         IIC           III           IV            V
 group
 Distance from
                               30 m            60 m        60 m          60 m          60 m         60 m
 threshold
 Length of inner edge         60 ma b       80 mc d       100 md         125 m        135 m         150 m
 Divergence                    10 %            10 %        10 %          10 %          10 %         10 %
                                        e             e             e            e             e
 Length                      1 600 m        2 500 m       2 500 m       2 500 m      2 500 m       2 500 me
 Slope                         5 %f            4 %f       3.33 %f       3.33 %f      3.33 %f       3.33 %f
 a
   Where runway width is above 23 m and up to 30 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 80 m.
 b
   Where runway width is above 30 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 100 m.
 c
   Where runway width is above 30 m and up to 45 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 100 m.
 d
   Where runway width is above 45 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 110 m.
 e
   See 4.2.1.10.
 f
   See 4.2.1.8 and 4.2.1.9.
                                                                                                                13

             Table 4-2.     Dimensions and slopes of approach surface — Instrument runways

 Aeroplane design
                                     I              IIA-IIB        IIC          III             IV             V
 group
 Distance from
                                   60 m              60 m         60 m         60 m            60 m          60 m
 threshold
 Length of inner edge             110 m a           125 mb       155 mc        175 m           185 m         200 m
 Divergence                        10%               10%          10%          10 %             10%          10%
                                           d                 d            d            d                d
 Length                           4 500 m           4 500 m      4 500 m      4 500 m       4 500 m         4 500 md
 Slope                            3.33%e        3.33%e        3.33%e         3.33%e            3.33%e       3.33%e
 a
   When the runway width is above 30 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 125 m.
 b
   When the runway width is above 30 m, the length of inner edge is increased to 140 m.
 c
   When the runway width is 30 m or less, the length of inner edge is decreased to 140 m.
 d
     See 4.2.1.10 and 4.2.1.11.
 e
     See 4.2.1.8 and 4.2.1.9.


                                            4.2.2    Transitional surfaces

    Note.— The purpose of the transitional surfaces is to establish the airspace to be maintained free from
fixed obstacles to protect an aeroplane in the overflight of the runway or go-around manoeuvre following
a standard 3.0° approach, beyond the approach surface. See Figure 4-1.

     4.2.2.1 Description.— Transitional surfaces. A complex surface along and at a specified distance
from the runway centre line and part of the side of the approach surface that slopes upwards and outwards
to a specified height.

      4.2.2.2   Characteristics.— The limits of a transitional surface shall comprise:

      a) a lower edge beginning on the side of the approach surface at the elevation of the upper edge and
         extending down the side of the approach surface to the inner edge of the approach surface and from
         there along a line extending parallel to and at a specified distance from the runway centre line and
         its extension, to the end of the strip; and

      b) an upper edge located at 60 m above the elevation of the highest threshold of the runway.

      4.2.2.3   The elevation of a point on the lower edge shall be:

      a) along the side of the approach surface — equal to the elevation of the approach surface at that point;
         and

      b) along the runway centre line and its extension after the threshold — equal to the elevation of the
         nearest point on the centre line of the runway or its extension.

     Note.— As a result of b) the transitional surfaces along the line parallel to the runway centre line will
be curved if the runway profile is curved, or a plane if the runway profile is a straight line. The upper edge
of the transitional surfaces will also be a curved or a straight line depending on the runway profile.

    4.2.2.4 The slope of the transitional surfaces shall be measured in a vertical plane perpendicular to
the vertical plane containing the runway centre line or its extension.

      4.2.2.5   The slope of the transitional surface shall not be greater than 20 per cent.
14




     Figure 4-1.   Approach surface and transitional surfaces
                                                                                                               15


                                       4.2.3   Inner approach surface

    Note.— The inner approach surface protects an aeroplane against fixed and mobile obstacles before
the threshold, in the descent phase of the balked landing or late go-around manoeuvres following a
standard 3.0° approach. See Figure 4-2 and Figure 4-3.

   4.2.3.1 Description.— Inner approach surface. A rectangular portion of the approach surface
immediately preceding the threshold.

     4.2.3.2   Characteristics.— The limits of the inner approach surface shall comprise:

     a) an inner edge coincident with the location of the inner edge of the approach surface but of its own
        specified length;

     b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and extending parallel to the vertical plane
        containing the centre line of the runway; and

     c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge.

    4.2.3.3 The surface mentioned in 4.2.3.2 shall be varied when lateral offset, angular offset or curved
approaches are utilized; two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and extending parallel to the
extended centre line of the lateral offset, angular offset or curved ground track.

    4.2.3.4 The dimensions of the inner approach surface for non-instrument runway shall not be less
than those specified in Table 4-3.

     4.2.3.5 The dimensions of the inner approach surface for non-precision approach runway shall not be
less than those specified in Table 4-4.

    4.2.3.6 The dimensions of the inner approach surface for precision approach runway shall not be less
than those specified in Table 4-5.

    4.2.3.7 If the slope of the approach surface is reduced, the length of the inner approach surface shall
be increased to provide protection to a height of 45 m (150 ft).

           Table 4-3.    Dimensions of inner approach surface — Non-instrument runways

 Aeroplane design
                                 I          IIA-IIB          IIC            III           IV             V
 group
 Length of inner edge          60 m          80 m          100 m         110 m          120 m         120 ma
 Length                       900 mb       1 125 mb       1 350 mb      1 350 mb       1 350 mb      1 350 mb
 a
   The length of inner edge is increased to 140 m on those aerodromes that accommodate a code letter F aeroplane
   that is not equipped with digital avionics that provide steering commands to maintain an established track
   during the go-around manoeuvre.
 b
   See 4.2.3.7.
16

       Table 4-4.      Dimensions of inner approach surface — Non-precision approach runways

 Aeroplane design
                                  I            IIA-IIB        IIC            III             IV             V
 group
 Length of inner edge           80 m            80 m         120 m          120 m          120 m          120 ma
 Length                      1 350 mb          1 350 mb    1 350 mb       1 350 mb       1 350 mb       1 350 mb
 a
   The length of inner edge is increased to 140 m on those aerodromes that accommodate a code letter F aeroplane
   that is not equipped with digital avionics that provide steering commands to maintain an established track during
   the go-around manoeuvre.
 b
   See 4.2.3.7.


          Table 4-5.     Dimensions of inner approach surface — Precision approach runways

 Aeroplane design
                                  I            IIA-IIB        IIC            III             IV             V
 group
 Length of inner edge           90 m            90 m         120 m          120 m          120 m          120 ma
 Length                      1 350 mb          1 350 mb    1 350 mb       1 350 mb       1 350 mb       1 350 mb
 a
   The length of inner edge is increased to 140 m on those aerodromes that accommodate a code letter F aeroplane
   that is not equipped with digital avionics that provide steering commands to maintain an established track during
   the go-around manoeuvre.
 b
   See 4.2.3.7.


                                       4.2.4    Inner transitional surfaces

    Note.— The inner transitional surfaces aim at establishing the airspace to be maintained free from
fixed and mobile obstacles to protect an aeroplane in the climb phase of the balked landing or late
go-around manoeuvres following a standard 3.0° approach, beyond the inner approach surface. See
Figure 4-2 and Figure 4-3.

     4.2.4.1   Description.— Inner transitional surfaces:

     a) Non-instrument and non-precision approach runways — A complex surface at a specified distance
        from the runway centre line consisting of two successive sections: a first section that rises vertically
        to a given height, followed by a second inclined section that slopes upwards and outwards to a
        specified height; and

     b) Precision approach runways — A surface similar to the transitional surface but closer to the
        runway.

     4.2.4.2   Characteristics.— On non-instrument and non-precision approach runways:

     a) the limits of the vertical section of the inner transitional surface shall comprise:

         1) a lower edge beginning on the side of the inner approach surface at a specified height above
            the inner edge of that surface, extending down the side of the inner approach surface to its inner
            edge, from there along a line parallel to and at a specified distance from the runway centre line,
            and its extension, to a specified length after the threshold and from there, vertically to a specific
            height; and

         2) an upper edge parallel to, and at a specified height above, the runway centre line;
                                                                                                              17

    b) the limits of the inclined section of the inner transitional surface shall comprise:

        1) a lower edge beginning at the end of the inner approach surface and extending down the side
           of the inner approach surface to the upper edge of the vertical section, from there along the
           upper edge of the vertical section; and

        2) an upper edge parallel to and at 60 m above the elevation of the highest threshold of the runway.

    4.2.4.3 Characteristics.— On precision approach runways, the limits of the inner transitional surface
shall comprise:

    a) a lower edge beginning at the end of the inner approach surface and extending down the side of the
       inner approach surface to the inner edge of that surface, from there along a line parallel to and at a
       specified distance from the runway centre line and its extension to the inner edge of the balked
       landing surface and from there up the side of the balked landing surface to the upper edge; and

    b) an upper edge located at 60 m above the elevation of the highest threshold of the runway.

    4.2.4.4   On non-instrument and non-precision approach runways, the elevation of a point shall be:

    a) on the lower edge of the vertical section:

        1) along the side of the inner approach surface — equal to the elevation of the inner approach
           surface at that point; and

        2) after the inner edge of the inner approach surface — equal to the elevation of the nearest point
           on the centre line of the runway or its extension;

    b) on the upper edge of the vertical section — equal to a specific height above the nearest point on the
       centre line of the runway or its extension;

    c) on the lower edge of the inclined section:

        1) along the side of the inner approach surface — equal to the elevation of the inner approach
           surface at that point; and

        2) along the upper edge of the lower section — equal to the elevation of the upper edge of the
           lower section at that point.

     Note.— As a result of a), b) and c) the two sections of the inner transitional surfaces along the centre
line of the runway will be curved if the runway profile is curved, or a plane if the runway profile is a straight
line. The upper edges of both sections of the inner transitional surfaces will also be curved or straight lines
depending on the runway profile.

    4.2.4.5   On precision approach runways, the elevation of a point on the lower edge shall be:

    a) along the side of the inner approach surface and balked landing surface — equal to the elevation of
       the particular surface at that point; and

    b) along the runway centre line and its extension — equal to the elevation of the nearest point on the
       centre line of the runway or its extension;
18

     Note.— As a result of b) the inner transitional surfaces along the centre line of the runway will be
curved if the runway profile is curved, or a plane if the runway profile is a straight line. The upper edge of
the inner transitional surfaces will also be a curved or a straight line depending on the runway profile.

     4.2.4.6   The slope of the inner transitional surfaces shall be measured:
     a) between the inner edges of the inner approach surface and balked landing surface: in a vertical
        plane perpendicular to the vertical plane containing the runway centre line and its extension;
     b) before the inner edge of the inner approach surface:

         1) where straight-in approaches are utilized: in a vertical plane perpendicular to the vertical plane
            containing the runway centre line and its extension; and

         2) where lateral offset, angular offset or curved approaches are utilized: along any straight part of
            the approach, in a vertical plane perpendicular to the vertical plane containing the straight part
            of the approach or, along any curved part of the approach, in the vertical plane tangent with the
            curved ground track.

    4.2.4.7 The slope of the inner transitional surfaces for non-instrument runway shall not be greater
than, and the height of the vertical section not lower than, that specified in Table 4-6.

    4.2.4.8 The slope of the inner transitional surfaces for non-precision approach runway shall not be
greater than, and the height of the vertical section not lower than, that specified in Table 4-7.

    4.2.4.9 The slope of the inner transitional surfaces for precision runway shall not be greater than that
specified in Table 4-8.

          Table 4-6.    Dimensions of inner transitional surfaces — Non-instrument runways

   Aeroplane design group           I        IIA-IIB           IIC         III           IV           V
    Height of the vertical
                                   6m           6m           8.4 m        10 m          5m           5m
            section
    Slope of the inclined
                                  40 %         40 %          33.3%        33.3%        33.3%        33.3%
            section
            Length                  a            a         1 800 mb      1 800 mb     1 800 mb     1 800 mb
 a
   To the end of the strip.
 b
   Or to the end of the runway, whichever is less.

     Table 4-7.     Dimensions of inner transitional surfaces — Non-precision approach runways

   Aeroplane design group           I        IIA-IIB           IIC         III           IV           V
    Height of the vertical
                                   6m           6m             5m          5m           5m           5m
            section
    Slope of the inclined
                                  40 %         40 %          33.3%        33.3%        33.3%        33.3%
            section
                                                                     b            b            b
            Length                  a            a         1 800 m       1 800 m      1 800 m      1 800 mb
 a
   To the end of the strip.
 b
   Or to the end of the runway, whichever is less.
                                                                                                                   19

          Table 4-8.      Slopes of inner transitional surfaces — Precision approach runways

  Aeroplane design group               I           IIA-IIB        IIC          III            IV             V
           Slope                     40 %            40 %        33.3%        33.3%          33.3%         33.3%
          Length                       a               a           a            a              a             a
 a
   See 4.2.4.3.


                                         4.2.5     Balked landing surface
     Note.— The balked landing surface is intended to be implemented on precision approach runways,
where the balked landing might be initiated at low height above the threshold and the climb phase of the
manoeuvre is not necessarily covered by the inner transitional surfaces. The balked landing surface aims
at establishing the airspace to be maintained free from fixed and mobile obstacles to protect an aeroplane
in the climb phase of the balked landing or late go-around manoeuvres following a standard 3.0° approach,
beyond the inner transitional surfaces. See Figure 4-3.
    4.2.5.1 Description.— Balked landing surface. An inclined surface located at a specified distance
after the threshold, extending between the inner transitional surfaces.
    4.2.5.2   Characteristics.— The limits of the balked landing surface shall comprise:
    a) an inner edge horizontal and perpendicular to the centre line of the runway and located at a specified
       distance after the threshold;
    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified rate from
       the vertical plane containing the centre line of the runway; and
    c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge and located at 60 m above the elevation of the highest
       threshold of the runway.
   4.2.5.3 The elevation of the inner edge shall be equal to the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centre line.
    4.2.5.4 The slope of the balked landing surface shall be measured in the vertical plane containing the
centre line of the runway and its extension;
     4.2.5.5 The slope of the balked landing surface shall not be greater than, and its other dimensions not
less than, those specified in Table 4-9.
                      Table 4-9.      Dimensions and slopes of balked landing surface

 Aeroplane design               I        IIA-IIB         IIC           III          IV            V
 group
 Distance from                  a            a        1 800 mb     1 800 mb      1 800 mb     1 800 mb
 threshold
 Length of inner              90 m          90 m        120 m        120 m        120 m        120 mc
 edge
 Divergence (each             10%           10%         10%           10%          10%           10%
 side)
 Slope                         5%           4%          3.33%        3.33%        3.33%         3.33%
 a. End of the strip.
 b. Or end of runway whichever is less.
 c. The length of inner edge is increased to 140 m on those aerodromes that accommodate a code letter F aeroplane
    that is not equipped with digital avionics that provide steering commands to maintain an established track during
    the go-around manoeuvre.
20




 Figure 4-2 Inner approach and inner transitional surfaces on a non-precision approach runway
                                                               21




Figure 4-3 Obstacle free zone on a precision approach runway
22

                                4.3   Obstacle evaluation surfaces (OES)

    Note 1.— The purpose of the obstacle evaluation surfaces is to establish the airspace necessary to
determine the acceptability of obstacles by evaluating their impact on existing and/or intended aeroplane
operations at an aerodrome. The impact is evaluated on safety, regularity and demand of the operations
identified by States.

     Note 2.— The OES detailed in the following specifications address most common flight operations and
operating minima. When the flight operations differ (e.g. variance in alignment, approach slope, approach
minima) specific obstacle evaluation surfaces may need to be established. Depending on the flight
operations and procedures available at an aerodrome, the OES may have specifications as specified in the
following provisions or may be varied to fit the operations at the aerodrome (e.g. in case of increased
minima or where circling does not occur on one side of the runway). There will be instances where
additional obstacle evaluation surfaces, beyond what are specified in this section, may be required as the
OES or its variations do not satisfactorily cover the local aeroplane operations specific to the aerodrome.

   Note 3.— Detailed specifications on the variation of the OES and their design are contained in
PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981).

                                                4.3.1   General

    4.3.1.1    States shall ensure that the obstacle evaluation surfaces specified in 4.5.2 have been
established to protect the existing and/or intended aeroplane operations at an aerodrome.

   4.3.1.2 Recommendation.— The characteristics and dimensions of the obstacle evaluation surfaces
should be in accordance with the provisions contained in 4.3.2 to 4.3.6.


     4.3.1.3 Recommendation.— Where it is necessary to preserve the accessibility of an aerodrome to
existing and planned operations, the provisions applicable to OFS contained in 4.4.4 to 4.4.8 should apply
to the identified obstacle evaluation surface.

     Note.— Detailed specifications are contained in PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981), Part II, Chapter 10.


                                        4.3.2    Horizontal surface

    Note.— The purpose of the horizontal surface is to protect the airspace for circling procedures. The
horizontal surface also provides some protection for visual circuits and terminal instrument flight
procedures, including PBN approaches, early turning missed approaches and early turning departures.
The design of the horizontal surface is consistent with the dimensions of the visual manoeuvring area
provided in PANS-OPS, (Doc 8168, Volume II, Part 1, Section 4, Chapter 7).

    4.3.2.1 Description.— Horizontal surface. A surface, or a combination of surfaces, located in a
horizontal plane, or in a series of horizontal planes, above an aerodrome and its environs.

    4.3.2.2 Characteristics.— The outer limits of the horizontal surface should be circular arcs centred
on runway thresholds joined tangentially by straight lines.

     4.3.2.3   The height of the horizontal surface shall be measured above the aerodrome elevation.

    4.3.2.4 Recommendation.— A horizontal surface should have a radius of not less than, and a height
of not greater than, those specified in Table 4-10.
                                                                                                        23

                            Table 4-10.    Dimensions of horizontal surface

 Aeroplane design group         I-IIA         IIB          IIC          III          IV            V
        Radius                 3 350 m      5 350 m     10 750 m     10 750 m     10 750 m      10 750 m
        Height                  45 m         60 m         90 m         90 m         90 m         90 m


    Note.— Where a runway is intended for the operations of aeroplanes of different aeroplane design
groups, all the horizontal surfaces specified by the radii and heights associated with these groups are
retained and the horizontal surface is composed of multiple surfaces located at different heights above the
aerodrome elevation.
24




                                     Figure 4-4.   Horizontal surface


                          4.3.3   Surface for straight-in instrument approaches

     Note.— The purpose of the surface for straight-in instrument approaches is to establish the airspace
where obstacles may have an impact on straight-in instrument approaches, where the horizontal surface(s)
or parts thereof are not established. As a single obstacle evaluation surface cannot address the variety of
all possible instrument approach procedures, only most common straight-in instrument approaches other
than precision approaches are considered. The surfaces for precision approaches are established in 4.3.4.

    4.3.3.1 Description.— Surface for straight-in instrument approaches. A combination of surfaces,
located in a series of horizontal planes above an aerodrome and its environs.

     4.3.3.2   Characteristics.— The surface for straight-in instrument approaches should consist of:
                                                                                                        25

    a) a lower part corresponding to the horizontal surface applicable to ADG I;

    b) an upper part corresponding to that part of the horizontal surface applicable to ADG II and III
       extending beyond the lateral limit of the lower section and delineated by the rectangle of following
       sides:

        1) two shorter sides perpendicular to and centred on the runway centre line and its extension; and

        2) two longer sides extending parallel to the runway centre line and its extension from a given
           distance before and after the thresholds of the runway.

   Note.— The characteristics of the surface for straight-in instrument approaches specified in 4.3.3.2 are
applicable to all ADGs.

    4.3.3.3   The heights of the lower section and upper section shall be measured above the aerodrome
elevation.

    4.3.3.4 Recommendation.— The heights of the surface for straight-in instrument approaches should
not be greater than, and its other dimensions not less than, those specified in Table4-11.

              Table 4-11.   Dimensions of surface for straight-in instrument approaches

                                           Aeroplane design group            I to V
                     Lower section                                            45 m
                                                    Height
                                                                          Horizontal
                                                    Length                 OES as
                                                                          per ADG I
                                                   Height                    60 m
                     Upper section         Length of shorter side          7 410 m
                                         Length of longer side from
                                                                            5 350 m
                                         the threshold or thresholds
26


                                                         B




                         A                                                            A




                                                          B


                                                       Plan view




                                                  Cross section A-A




                                                  CrosssectionB-B




                                                   Axonometric view
                        Figure 4-5.     Surface for straight-in instrument approaches


                                4.3.4    Surface for precision approaches

    Note.— The purpose of the surface for precision approaches is to establish the airspace where obstacles
may have an impact on common straight-in precision approach procedures (using ILS or MLS, ground-
based augmentation system (GBAS) or satellite-based augmentation system (SBAS) CAT I). The design of
the surface is consistent with the dimensions of the basic ILS surfaces provided in PANS-OPS (Doc 8186)
Volume II, Part II, Section I, Chapter 1. Adjustments to the surface may be necessary in case of offset
procedures.

     4.3.4.1   Description.— Surface for precision approaches. A complex surface composed of:

     a) an approach component consisting of an inclined surface preceding the threshold;
                                                                                                        27

    b) a missed approach component consisting of an inclined surface located at a specific distance after
       the threshold;

    c) transitional components consisting of complex surfaces at a specified distance from the runway
       centre line and along the approach component and missed approach component, that slopes
       upwards and outwards; and

    d) a lower component specified by a rectangular surface within the inner edges of the above
       components.

    Note.— The transitional components consist of a pair of surfaces, located on either side of the runway
centre line. Each surface of this pair is called a transitional component.


    4.3.4.2 Characteristics.— The limits of the approach component of the surface for precision
approaches should comprise:

    a) an inner edge of specified length, horizontal and perpendicular to the extended centre line of the
       runway and located at a specified distance before the threshold;

    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified rate from
       the extended centre line of the runway to a specified distance and diverging uniformly thereafter at
       another specified rate for the remainder of the length of the approach component; and

    c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge.

    4.3.4.3 The elevation of the inner edge of the approach component shall be equal to the elevation of
the midpoint of the threshold.

    4.3.4.4 Recommendation.— The slope of the approach component should be measured in the
vertical plane containing the centre line of the runway and its extension.

    4.3.4.5 Characteristics.— The limits of the missed approach component of surface for precision
approaches should comprise:

    a) an inner edge of specified length, horizontal and perpendicular to the extended centre line of the
       runway and located at a specified distance after the threshold;

    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified rate from
       the extended centre line of the runway to a specified distance and diverging uniformly thereafter at
       another specified rate for the remainder of the length of the missed approach component; and

    c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge.

    4.3.4.6 The elevation of the inner edge of the missed approach component shall be equal to the
elevation of the midpoint of the threshold.

     Note.— In some cases, the inner edge of the missed approach component may be below the elevation
of the midpoint of the threshold, for example where runways slope upward.

    4.3.4.7 Recommendation.— The slope of the missed approach component should be measured in
the vertical plane containing the centre line of the runway and its extension.
28

    4.3.4.8 Characteristics.— The limits of the transitional component of the surface for precision
approaches should comprise:

     a) a lower edge beginning on the side of the approach component at the elevation of the upper edge
        and extending down the side of the approach component to the inner edge of the approach
        component, from there along a line extending horizontally to the inner edge of the missed approach
        component, and from there extending up the side of the missed approach component to the upper
        edge; and

     b) an upper edge located at 300 m above the threshold elevation.

     4.3.4.9 The elevation of a point on the lower edge of the transitional component shall be:

     a) along the side of the approach component and missed approach component — equal to the elevation
        of the particular surface at that point; and

     b) between the inner edges of the approach component and missed approach component — equal to
        the elevation of the midpoint of the threshold.

   Note.— In some cases, the lower edge of the transitional component may be below the elevation of the
midpoint of the threshold, for example where runways slope upward.

    4.3.4.10 Recommendation.— The slope of the transitional component should be measured in the
vertical plane perpendicular to the centre line of the runway and its extension.

   4.3.4.11 Characteristics.— The limits of the lower component of the surface for precision approaches
should comprise:

     a) two shorter sides corresponding with the inner edge of the approach component and missed
        approach component; and

     b) two longer sides corresponding with the inner edges of the transitional components.

   4.3.4.12 The elevation of a point on the lower component shall be equal to the elevation of the
midpoint of the threshold.

   4.3.4.13 Recommendation.— The slopes of the different components of the surface for precision
approach runways should not be greater than, and their other dimensions not less than, those specified in
Table 4-12.

                     Table 4-12.    Dimensions of surface for precision approaches

                           Aeroplane design group                                           I to V
                                            Distance from threshold                     60 m
                                            Length of inner edge                        300 m
                                            Length                                      3 000 m
                                1st section Divergence (each side)                      15 %
        Approach component
                                            Slope                                       2%
                                            Length                                      9 600 m
                                2nd section Divergence (each side)                      15 %
                                            Slope                                       2.5 %
                                            Distance after threshold                    900 m
     Missed approach component
                                            Length of inner edge                        300 m
                                                                            29

                     Aeroplane design group                        I to V
                                      Length                   1 800 m
                          1st section Divergence (each side)   17.48 %
                                      Slope                    2.5 %
                                      Length                   10 200 m
                          2nd section Divergence (each side)   25 %
                                      Slope                    2.5 %
Transitional component                Slope                    14.3 %
30
               Missed approach 2nd section
                                  Missed approach 1st section                                Approach 2nd section
                                                                     Approach 1st section
                                                                B


                    A                                                                                        A



                                                                B
                                                         Plan view




                Missed approach 2nd section                                                 Approach 2nd section
                                Missed approach 1st section                Approach 1st section


                                                    Cross section A-A




                                                    Cross section B-B

                                                                                Approach 2nd section




                                                                                 Approach 1st section



                                                                         Missed approach 1st section


                   Missed approach 2nd section

                                                    Axonometric view

                               Figure 4-6.        Surface for precision approaches


                                      4.3.5      Instrument departure surface

     Note.— The purpose of the instrument departure surface is to establish the airspace where obstacles
may have an impact on aircraft following an omnidirectional instrument departure procedure. The design
of the instrument departure surface is consistent with the dimensions provided in PANS-OPS (Doc 8168,
Volume II, Part I, Section 3, Chapter 4).

     4.3.5.1 Description.— Instrument departure surface. An inclined surface, along the runway centre
line and its extension after the end of the take-off distance available.
                                                                                                        31


    4.3.5.2   Characteristics.— The limits of the instrument departure surface should comprise:

    a) an inner edge of specified length, horizontal and perpendicular to the centre line of the runway and
       located at the end of the take-off distance available;

    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified rate from
       the extended centre line of the runway to a specified distance and diverging uniformly thereafter at
       another specified rate for the remainder of the length of the instrument departure surface; and

    c) an outer edge parallel to the inner edge.

     4.3.5.3 The elevation of the inner edge shall be 5 m above the elevation of the runway centre line and
its extension at the end of the take-off distance available.

    4.3.5.4 The slope of the instrument departure surface shall be measured in the vertical plane
containing the centre line of the runway and its extension.

    4.3.5.5 Recommendation.— The slope of the instrument departure surface should not be greater
than, and its other dimensions not less than, those specified in Table4-13.

                      Table 4-13.    Dimensions of instrument departure surface

                                    Aeroplane design group             I to V
                                    Length of inner edge               300 m
                                    Slope                              2.5 %
                                    Length                             3 500 m
                   First section
                                    Divergence                         26.8 %
                                    Length                             8 300 m
                  Second section
                                    Divergence                         57.8 %
32




                                        B                                                   A
                            A                                                  Take-off
                                                                                 Take-off
                                        B




                                                        Plan view




                                                                    Take-off
                     60 m          5m



                                                    Cross section A-A




                                                         Take-off



                                                    CrosssectionB-B




                                                     Take-off




                                                     Axonometric view

                                Figure 4-7.          Instrument departure surface


                                            4.3.6    Take-off climb surface

    Note 1.— The purpose of the take-off climb surface is to establish the airspace where obstacles may
have an impact on aircraft operating limitations during take-off under non-critical operating conditions.
The design of the take-off climb surface is consistent with the take-off obstacle clearance limitations
provided in the Aeroplane Performance Manual (Doc 10064, Chapter 3), and Annex 6, Part I.

     Note 2.— Obstacles that have no impact on aircraft operating limitations during take-off under
                                                                                                            33

non-critical operating conditions could have an impact in case of engine failure or abnormal (e.g. extreme
weather conditions) and emergency situations (e.g. system failure).

    4.3.6.1 Description.— Take-off climb surface. An inclined surface beyond the end of the take-off
distance available.

    4.3.6.2   Characteristics.— The limits of the take-off climb surface should comprise:

    a) an inner edge horizontal and perpendicular to the centre line of the runway and located at a specified
       distance beyond the end of the runway or at the end of the take-off distance available;

    b) two sides originating at the ends of the inner edge, diverging uniformly at a specified rate from the
       take-off ground track to a specified final width and continuing thereafter at that width for the
       remainder of the length of the take-off climb surface; and

    c) an outer edge horizontal and perpendicular to the specified take-off track.

    4.3.6.3 Recommendation.— The above surface should vary when take-off flight paths involving
turns are utilized; two sides originating at the end of the inner edge and diverging uniformly at a specified
rate from the extended centre line of the take-off ground track to a specified final width, and extending
thereafter parallel to the take-off ground track for the remainder of the length of the take-off climb surface.

    4.3.6.4 The elevation of the inner edge shall be equal to the highest point on the extended runway
centre line between the end of the take-off run available and the inner edge of the take-off climb surface.

    4.3.6.5   The slope of the take-off climb surface shall be measured:

    a) in the vertical plane containing the centre line of the runway and its extension where straight
       take-off flight path are utilized;

    b) along any straight part of the take-off flight path, in the vertical plane containing the centre line of
       the take-off flight path or, along any curved part of the take-off flight path, in the vertical plane
       tangent with the take-off flight path where take-off flight paths involving turns are utilized.

    4.3.6.6 Recommendation.— On runways intended for operations of aeroplanes with a maximum
certificated take-off mass up to 5 700 kg, the slope of the take-off climb surface should not be greater than,
and its other dimensions not less than, those specified in Table4-14, except that:

    a) a lesser length should be adopted for the take-off climb surface where such lesser length would be
       consistent with procedural measures adopted to govern the outward flight of aeroplanes; and

    b) a higher slope should be adopted for the take-off climb surface where such slope would be
       consistent with the operational characteristics of the critical aeroplane operating out of the runway
       and the local conditions.

    4.3.6.7 Recommendation.— On runways intended for operations of aeroplanes with a maximum
certificated take-off mass greater than 5 700 kg, the slope of the take-off climb surface should not be greater
than, and its other dimensions not less than, those specified in Table 4-15, except that:

    a) a lesser length should be adopted for the take-off climb surface where such lesser length would be
       consistent with procedural measures adopted to govern the outward flight of aeroplanes; and
34

      b) a higher slope should be adopted for the take-off climb surface where such slope would be
         consistent with the operational characteristics of the critical aeroplane operating out of the runway
         and the local conditions.

    4.3.6.8 Recommendation.— The slope of the take-off climb surface should not be increased to
facilitate the growth of obstacles.

     Note.— The slope of the take-off climb surface is intended to adapt to the operations of aeroplanes
whose climb performances on take-off climb are such that a slope of 2 per cent is not necessary. However,
this slope is not intended to be increased to enable the growth of obstacles. Specifications concerning the
increase of the slope of the take-off climb surface are contained in PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981), Part II,
Chapter 10.

    4.3.6.9 Recommendation.— The operational characteristics of aeroplanes for which the runway is
intended should be examined to see if it is desirable to reduce the slope specified in Table 4-14 and
Table 4-15 to 1.6 per cent when critical operating conditions are to be catered to. If the specified slope is
reduced, corresponding adjustment in the length of the take-off climb surface should be made so as to
provide protection to a height equal to that reached with the slopes and lengths in Table 4-14 and 4-15.

Table 4-14.        Dimensions of take-off climb surface – runways with operations of aeroplanes with a
                                             mass up to 5 700 kg

 Aeroplane design
                                         I          IIA-IIB           IICa             IIIa            IVa                Va
 group
 Distance from runway
                                      30 m            60 m              -               -               -                 -
 endb
 Length of inner edge                 60 m            80 m              -               -               -                 -
 Divergence (each side)               10%             10%               -               -               -                 -
 Final width                         380 m           580 m              -               -               -                 -
 Length                             1 600 m         2 500 m             -               -               -                 -
 Slope                                 5%              4%               -               -               -                 -
 a. Aeroplanes with a mass up to but not including 5 700 kg generally belong to aeroplane design groups I, IIA and IIB.
 b. The take-off climb surface starts at the end of the clearway if the clearway length exceeds the specified distance.


Table 4-15.        Dimensions of take-off climb surface – runways with operations of aeroplanes with a
                                            mass above 5 700 kg

 Aeroplane design
                                        I          IIA-IIB            IIC             III              IV                 V
 group
 Distance from TODA                     -              -                -               -               -                 -
 Length of inner edge                144 m          156 m           156 m           172 m           180 m           180 m
 Divergence (each side)              12.5%          12.5%           12.5%           12.5%           12.5%           12.5%
                                             a               a               a                a              a
 Final width                       1 800 m        1 800 m         1 800 m         1 800 m          1 800 m         1 800 m a
 Length                            10 000 m       10 000 m        10 000 m        10 000 m        10 000 m         10 000 m
 Slope                                5%              4%              2%              2%              2%              2%
 a   Where given operational conditions and performances are met, the final width can be decreased. Specifications concerning
     this reduction are contained in the Airport Services Manual (Doc 9137), Part 6.
                                                                                                           35




                                   Figure 4-8    Take-off climb surface


                                 4.4   Obstacle limitation requirements

    Obstacle free surfaces

    4.4.1 Fixed objects shall not be permitted above the inner approach surface, inner transitional surfaces
and balked landing surface and that complex surface extending between the lower edges of the inner
transitional surfaces. Visual aids required for air navigation purposes or those objects required for aircraft
36

safety purposes, and which must project into the airspace above the inner approach surface, inner
transitional surfaces and balked landing surface or that complex surface extending between the lower edges
of the inner transitional surfaces are permitted.

    Note.— Specifications concerning objects required for aircraft safety purposes are provided in the
Airport Services Manual (Doc 9137), Part 6 – Control of Obstacles. Such objects may for example consist
of arresting systems, arresting cables, arresting beds, FOD detection systems, wildlife hazard equipment.

    4.4.2 Visual aids required for air navigation purposes or those fixed objects required for aircraft safety
purposes and which project into the airspace above the inner approach surface, inner transitional surfaces
and balked landing surface or that complex surface extending between the lower edges of the inner
transitional surfaces shall be frangible and mounted as low as possible.

    4.4.3 Mobile objects shall not be permitted above the inner approach surface, inner transitional
surfaces, balked landing surface and that complex surface extending between the lower edges of the inner
transitional surfaces during the use of the runway for landing.

    4.4.4 New objects or extensions of existing objects shall not be permitted above the approach surface
and transitional surfaces and the complex surface extending between the lower edges of the transitional
surfaces. Equipment and installations required for air navigation or for aircraft safety purposes, and which
must project into the airspace above the approach surface and transitional surfaces or that complex surface
extending between the lower edges of the transitional surfaces are permitted.

    4.4.5 Equipment and installations required for air navigation or for aircraft safety purposes and which
must project into the airspace above the approach surface and transitional surfaces or that complex surface
extending between the lower edges of the transitional surfaces shall be frangible and mounted as low as
possible.

    4.4.6 Recommendation.— Existing obstacles above the approach surface, and transitional surfaces
or that complex surface extending between the lower edges of the transitional surfaces should as far as
practicable be removed.

    4.4.7 States shall ensure that existing terrain and/or obstacles that cannot be removed and penetrate
the approach surface and transitional surfaces or that complex surface extending between the lower edges
of the transitional surfaces are only permitted when, after aeronautical study, it is determined that the
obstacles do not adversely affect the safety or significantly affect the regularity of operations of aeroplanes.

   Note.— Detailed specifications concerning aeronautical study are provided in PANS-Aerodromes
(Doc 9981), Part II, Chapter 10.

Obstacle evaluation surfaces

    4.4.8 States shall ensure that obstacles penetrating the obstacle evaluation surfaces are only permitted
when, after aeronautical study, it is determined that the obstacles do not adversely affect the safety or
significantly affect the regularity of the existing and intended operations of aeroplanes.

   Note.— Detailed specifications concerning aeronautical study is given in PANS-Aerodromes
(Doc 9981), Part II, Chapter 10.

                             4.5 Obstacle limitation surfaces requirements

    Note 1.— The requirements for obstacle free surfaces are specified on the basis of the intended use of
a runway and are intended to be applied when such use is made of the runway.
                                                                                                           37

    Note 2.— The requirements for obstacle evaluation surfaces are specified on the basis of the intended
use and/or intended operations on the runway. When different obstacle evaluation surfaces overlap each
other, each individual surface must be considered as they have specific functions.


                                        4.5.1   Obstacle free surfaces

    4.5.1.1 The following obstacle free surfaces shall be established for a non-instrument or non-precision
approach runway:

    a) approach surface;

    b) transitional surfaces;

    c) inner approach surface; and

    d) inner transitional surfaces.

    4.5.1.2   The following obstacle free surfaces shall be established for a precision approach runway:

    a) Approach surface;

    b) transitional surfaces;

    c) inner approach surface;

    d) inner transitional surfaces; and

    e) balked landing surface.


                                      4.5.2 Obstacle evaluation surfaces

    4.5.2.1    The following obstacle evaluation surfaces shall be established:

    a) in case of circling approach and/or visual circuits — the horizontal surface specified in 4.3.2 or a
       specific OES;

    b) in case of straight-in instrument approaches other than precision approaches, where the horizontal
       surface is not established — the surface for straight-in instrument approaches specified in 4.3.3 or
       a specific OES;

    c) in case of precision approach procedure — the surface for precision approaches specified in 4.3.4
       or a specific OES;

    d) in case of instrument departure procedure — the instrument departure surface specified in 4.3.5 or
       a specific OES;

    e) in case of take-off operations — the take-off climb surface specified in 4.3.6 or a specific OES; and

    f) in case of operations different from the above — specific OES.

    Note 1.— Operations mentioned in f) may include curved approach, VFR circuit patterns, etc.
38

   Note 2.— Specifications and further guidance related to specific OES are contained in
PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981) and in the Airport Services Manual (Doc 9137), Part 6—Control of
Obstacles.”


           4.6   Objects outside the obstacle free surfaces and obstacle evaluation surfaces

    4.6.1 Recommendation.— In areas beyond the limits of the obstacle limitation surfaces, at least
those objects which extend to a height of 100 m or more above ground elevation should be regarded as
obstacles, unless an aeronautical study indicates that they do not constitute a hazard to the operations of
intended aeroplane.

                                                  End of new text.


                         CHAPTER 5.         VISUAL AIDS FOR NAVIGATION
...

                                                  5.2   Markings

...

                                          5.2.4     Threshold marking

Application

    5.2.4.1 A threshold marking shall be provided at the threshold of a paved instrument runway, and of
a paved non-instrument runway where the code number is 3 or 4 and the runway is intended for use by
international commercial air transport.

    5.2.4.2 Recommendation.— A threshold marking should be provided at the threshold of a paved
non-instrument runway where the code number is 3 or 4 and the runway is intended for use by other than
international commercial air transport.

                          Editorial Note.— Renumber subsequent paragraphs.

...

                                 5.2.16     Mandatory instruction marking
...

Location

    5.2.16.3 The mandatory instruction marking on taxiways where the code letter is A, B, C or D
OMGWS is up to but not including 9 m shall be located across the taxiway equally placed about the taxiway
centre line and on the holding side of the runway-holding position marking as shown in Figure 5-10 (A).
The distance between the nearest edge of the marking and the runway-holding position marking or the
taxiway centre line marking shall be not less than 1 m.
...

    5.2.16.4 The mandatory instruction marking on taxiways where the code letter is E or F OMGWS
from 9 m up to but not including 15 m shall be located on both sides of the taxiway centre line marking and
on the holding side of the runway-holding position marking as shown in Figure 5-10 (B). The distance
                                                                                                             39

between the nearest edge of the marking and the runway-holding position marking or the taxiway centre
line marking shall be not less than 1 m.
...

Characteristics

     5.2.16.9 Recommendation.— The character height should be 4 m for inscriptions where the code
letter is C, D, E or F OMGWS is from 6 m up to but not including 15 m, and 2 m where the code letter is A
or B OMGWS is up to but not including 6 m. The inscriptions should be in the form and proportions shown
in Appendix 3.
...


                                                 5.3   Lights

                                               5.3.1   General
...

Light intensity and control

    Note.— In dusk or poor visibility conditions by day, lighting can be more effective than marking. For
lights to be effective in such conditions or in poor visibility by night, they must be of adequate intensity. To
obtain the required intensity, it will usually be necessary to make the light directional, in which case the
arcs over which the light shows will have to be adequate and so orientated as to meet the operational
requirements. The runway lighting system will have to be considered as a whole, to ensure that the relative
light intensities are suitably matched to the same end and are maintained over time. (See Attachment A,
Section 15, and on intensity. Guidance on maintenance criteria for aeronautical ground lights and on the
use of a site standard is contained in the Aerodrome Design Manual (Doc 9157), Part 4).

...

                                     5.3.12    Runway centre line lights

...

Location

    5.3.12.5 Runway centre line lights shall be located along the centre line of the runway, except that the
lights may be uniformly offset to the same side of the runway centre line by not more than 60 cm where it
is not practicable to locate them along the centre line. The lights shall be located from the threshold to the
end at longitudinal spacing of approximately 15 m. Where the serviceability level of the runway centre line
lights specified as maintenance objectives in 10.5.7 or 10.5.11, as appropriate, can be demonstrated and the
runway is intended for use in runway visual range conditions of 350 300 m or greater, the longitudinal
spacing may be approximately 30 m.
...
40

                                  5.3.15   Rapid exit taxiway indicator lights
...

Application

    5.3.15.1 Recommendation.— Rapid exit taxiway indicator lights should be provided on a runway
intended for use in runway visual range conditions less than a value of 350 300 m and/or where the traffic
density is heavy.

          Note.— See Attachment A, Section 14.

...

                                      5.3.17   Taxiway centre line lights

Application

     5.3.17.1 Taxiway centre line lights shall be provided on an exit taxiway, taxiway, de-icing/anti-icing
facility and apron intended for use in runway visual range conditions less than a value of 350 m 300 m in
such a manner as to provide continuous guidance between the runway centre line and aircraft stands, except
that these lights need not be provided where the traffic density is light and taxiway edge lights and centre
line marking provide adequate guidance.

     5.3.17.2 Recommendation.— Taxiway centre line lights should be provided on a taxiway intended
for use at night in runway visual range conditions of 350 300 m or greater, and particularly on complex
taxiway intersections and exit taxiways, except that these lights need not be provided where the traffic
density is light and taxiway edge lights and centre line marking provide adequate guidance.

...

    5.3.17.4 Taxiway centre line lights shall be provided on a runway forming part of a standard taxi-route
and intended for taxiing in runway visual range conditions less than a value of 350 300 m, except that these
lights need not be provided where the traffic density is light and taxiway edge lights and centre line marking
provide adequate guidance.

...

      5.3.17.9   Taxiway centre line lights shall be in accordance with the specifications of:

      a) Appendix 2, Figure A2-12, A2-13, or A2-14, for taxiways intended for use in runway visual range
         conditions of less than a value of 350 300 m; and

      b) Appendix 2, Figure A2-15 or A2-16, for other taxiways.

     5.3.17.10 Recommendation.— Where higher intensities are required, from an operational point of
view, taxiway centre line lights on rapid exit taxiways intended for use in runway visual range conditions
less than a value of 350 300 m should be in accordance with the specifications of Appendix 2, Figure A2 -12.
The number of levels of brilliancy settings for these lights should be the same as that for the runway centre
line lights.

...
                                                                                                         41

Taxiway centre line lights on taxiways

Location

   5.3.17.13 Recommendation.— Taxiway centre line lights on a straight section of a taxiway
should be spaced at longitudinal intervals of not more than 30 m, except that:

      ...

      c) on a taxiway intended for use in RVR conditions of less than a value of 350 300 m, the longitudinal
         spacing should not exceed 15 m.
...

    5.3.17.15 Recommendation.— On a taxiway intended for use in RVR conditions of less than a value
of 350 300 m, the lights on a curve should not exceed a spacing of 15 m, and on a curve of less than 400 m
radius the lights should be spaced at intervals of not greater than 7.5 m. This spacing should extend for
60 m before and after the curve.

    Note 1.— Spacings on curves that have been found suitable for a taxiway intended for use in RVR
conditions of 350 300 m or greater are:

      Curve radius       Light spacing

      up to 400 m      7.5 m
      401 m to 899 m   15 m
      900 m or greater 30 m.

...

Taxiway centre line lights on runways

Location

    5.3.17.20 Recommendation.— Taxiway centre line lights on a runway forming part of a standard
taxi-route and intended for taxiing in runway visual range conditions less than a value of 350 300 m should
be spaced at longitudinal intervals not exceeding 15 m.

...

                                     5.3.19   Runway turn pad lights

Application

    5.3.19.1 Runway turn pad lights shall be provided for continuous guidance on a runway turn pad
intended for use in runway visual range conditions less than a value of 350 300 m, to enable an aeroplane
to complete a 180-degree turn and align with the runway centre line.

...
42

                              5.3.21   Intermediate holding position lights

...


Application

    5.3.21.1 Except where a stop bar has been installed, intermediate holding position lights shall be
provided at an intermediate holding position intended for use in runway visual range conditions less than a
value of 350 300 m.

...

                                 5.3.25    Visual docking guidance system

Application

    5.3.25.1 A visual docking guidance system shall be provided when it is intended to indicate, by a
visual aid, the precise positioning of an aircraft on an aircraft stand and other alternative means, such as
marshallers, are not practicable.

    Note.— The factors to be considered in evaluating the need for a visual docking guidance system are
in particular: the number and type(s) of aircraft using the aircraft stand, weather conditions, space
available on the apron and the precision required for manoeuvring into the parking position due to aircraft
servicing installation, passenger loading boarding bridges, etc. See the Aerodrome Design Manual
(Doc 9157), Part 4 — Visual Aids for guidance on the selection of suitable systems.


Characteristics

...

    5.3.25.6 The accuracy of the system shall be adequate for the type of loading passenger boarding
bridge and fixed aircraft servicing installations with which it is to be used.

...

                                  5.3.28    Road-holding position light

Application

    5.3.28.1 A road-holding position light shall be provided at each road-holding position serving a
runway when it is intended that the runway will be used in runway visual range conditions less than a value
of 350 300 m.

    5.3.28.2 Recommendation.— A road-holding position light should be provided at each road-holding
position serving a runway when it is intended that the runway will be used in runway visual range conditions
of values between 350 300 m and 550 m.

...
                                                                                                          43

                                                  5.4   Signs

                                               5.4.1    General
...

Characteristics

    5.4.1.3 Signs shall be frangible. Those located near a runway or taxiway shall be sufficiently low to
preserve clearance for propellers and the engine pods of jet aircraft. The installed height of the sign shall
not exceed the dimension shown in the appropriate column of Table 5-5., except for runway distance
remaining signs (see 5.4.8).

    5.4.1.4   Signs Mandatory instruction signs and information signs shall be rectangular, as shown in
Figures 5-30 and 5-31 with the longer side horizontal.
...


                                          5.4.3   Information signs

      Note 1.— See Figure 5-31 for pictorial representations of information signs.

    Note 2.— See Chapter 7, 7.4.3 for specifications related to unserviceability signs providing information
on operational restrictions and construction works at aerodromes.

...


                                          Insert new text as follows:

                                  5.4.8   Runway distance remaining signs

    Note 1.― The inclusion of detailed specifications for runway distance remaining signs (RDRS) in this
section is not intended to imply that an RDRS has to be provided. Attachment A, Section 23, provides
guidance on the need to provide RDRSs. Guidance on installing RDRSs is given in the Aerodrome Design
Manual (Doc 9157), Part 4.

    Note 2.― Runway excursions may take place in all visibility or weather conditions. The use of RDRS
can form part of effective runway excursion prevention measures. The purpose of RDRSs is to provide pilots
with distance-to-go information to the extremity of the runway, to enhance situational awareness and
enable pilots to decide whether to commence a go-around or to apply braking action for more efficient roll-
out and runway exit speeds. It is essential that pilots operating at aerodromes with RDRS be familiar with
the purpose of these signs.

    Note 3.― Provisions related to the identification of hazards and management of safety risks, including
the need for safety risk assessment related to runway safety, is available in PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981),
Chapter 8.

Location

    5.4.8.1 Where provided, runway distance remaining signs (RDRS) shall be placed along the full
length of the runway at longitudinal spacing of approximately 300 m, parallel and equidistant from the
runway centre line.
44

   Note.― Displaced threshold areas that are used for take-off and/or roll-out are treated as part of the
runway for purposes of locating the signs.

   5.4.8.2 Runway distance remaining signs shall be placed outside the edges of the runway at a distance
shown in Table 5-6.


Characteristics

     5.4.8.3   Where provided, an RDRS shall consist of an inscription in white on a black background.

    5.4.8.4 The installed height of the RDRS shall not exceed the dimension shown in the appropriate
column of Table 5-6. All RDRSs on one runway shall be the same size.


                  Table 5-6.    Location distances for runway distance remaining signs

                               Sign height (mm)
                                                                      Perpendicular distance from
                Code                          Face      Installed     defined runway pavement
                               Legend                                 edge to near side of sign
               number                        (min.)      (max.)

               1 or 2            640          760         1070                6－10.5 m
               3 or 4           1000         1200         1520               15－22.5 m
               3 or 4           1200         1500         1600               25 m or more

                                              End of new text.

….
                                                                                                                           45

                  Editorial Note.— Replace Figures 5-7 and 5-10 with new figures below.



                                                                         0.9 m     0.9 m




           0.9 m



                                                                 (b) Second hold position

               0.9 m                                                       1.5 m      1.5 m


               3m                                                                                      at least 3 dashes

              1m
                                    47 m




                                                                        (c) Intersecting Taxiway




A             D          D            A

       B             C          B
                                                                 47 m

    A 7.5 – 15 cm (Note 1)
     B 15 cm
    C 15.– 30 cm (Note 2)                                                   (d) "T" Intersection
    D 15 cm

    Note 1: Black background for contrast on
            light-coloured pavements.
    Note 2: Continuous yellow centre line.



              (a) Dimensions
                                                                           (e) Between two holding positions




                             Figure 5-7.       Enhanced taxiway centre line marking
46




     Figure 5-10.   Mandatory instruction marking
                                                                                                     47

                          Editorial Note.— Modify Figure 5-15 as indicated.




    Figure 5-15. Inner 300 m approach and runway lighting for precision approach runways,
categories II and III, where the serviceability levels of the lights specified as maintenance objectives
                                 in Chapter 10 can be demonstrated


...
48


                   CHAPTER 6.         VISUAL AIDS FOR DENOTING OBSTACLES

...
                                6.2    Marking and/or lighting of objects
...

                                           6.2.2   Mobile objects

...

Lighting

...

    6.2.2.8 Low-intensity obstacle lights on objects with limited mobility such as passenger boarding
aerobridges shall be fixed-red, and as a minimum be in accordance with the specifications for low-intensity
obstacle lights, Type A, in Table 6-1. The intensity of the lights shall be sufficient to ensure conspicuity
considering the intensity of the adjacent lights and the general levels of illumination against which they
would normally be viewed.

...


                           CHAPTER 7. VISUAL AIDS FOR DENOTING
                                 RESTRICTED USE AREAS


                          7.1   Closed runways and taxiways or parts thereof

                                              7.1.1   General

Editorial Note.— Relocate sections 7.1.5 to 7.1.7 under new 7.1.1 with modifications as indicated below.

    7.1.57.1.1.1 When a runway or taxiway or portion thereof is permanently closed, all normal runway
and taxiway markings shall be obliterated.

    7.1.67.1.1.2 Lighting on systems provided for a closed runway or taxiway or portion thereof shall not
be operated, except as required for maintenance purposes.

      Note.— Lighting systems provided for a runway include both approach and runway lighting systems.

    7.1.77.1.1.3 In addition to closed markings, as specified in 7.1.2 and 7.1.3, when the a closed runway
or taxiway or portion thereof is intercepted by ausable runway or taxiway which is can be used at night,
unserviceability lights shall be placed across the entrance to the closed area at intervals not exceeding 3 m
(see 7.4.4 2).
                                                                                                          49

                                      7.1.2   Closed runway marking


Editorial Note.— Relocate sections 7.1.1 to 7.1.4 below as new 7.1.2 with modifications as indicated.

Application

   7.1.17.1.2.1 A closed runway marking shall be displayed on a runway or taxiway or portion thereof
which is permanently closed to the use of all aircraft.

    7.1.27.1.2.2 Recommendation.— A closed runway marking should be displayed on a temporarily
closed runwayor taxiway or portion thereof, except that such marking may be omitted when the closing is
of short duration and adequate warning by air traffic services is provided.


Location

    7.1.37.1.2.3 On a runway a A closed runway marking shall be placed at eachend extremity of the
runway, or portion thereof, declared closed, and additional markings shall be so placed that the maximum
interval between markings does not exceed 300 m. On a taxiway a closed marking shall be placed at each
end of the taxiway or portion thereof closed.


Characteristics

    7.1.47.1.2.4 The closed runway marking shall be white and of the form and proportions as detailed in
Figure 7-1, Illustration a), when displayed on a runway, and shall be of the form and proportions as detailed
in Figure 7-1, Illustration b), when displayed on a taxiway. The marking shall be white when displayed on
a runway and shall be yellow when displayed on a taxiway.

    Note 1.— When an area is temporarily closed, frangible barriers or markings utilizing materials other
than paint or other suitable means may be used to identify the closed area.

   Note 2. — Procedures pertaining to the planning, coordination, monitoring and safety management of
works in progress on the movement area are specified in the PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981).


                                      7.1.3   Closed taxiway marking

Editorial Note.— Duplicate and relocate sections 7.1.1 to 7.1.4 under new 7.1.3 with modifications as
                 indicated.

Application

   7.1.17.1.3.1 A closed taxiway marking shall be displayed on a runway or taxiway or portion thereof
which is permanently closed to the use of all aircraft.

    7.1.27.1.3.2 Recommendation.— A closed taxiway marking should be displayed on a temporarily
closedrunway or taxiway or portion thereof, except that such marking may be omitted when the closing is
of short duration and adequate warning by air traffic services is provided.
50

Location

    7.1.37.1.3.3 On a runway a closed marking shall be placed at each end of the runway, or portion
thereof, declared closed, and additional markings shall be so placed that the maximum interval between
markings does not exceed 300 m. On a A closed taxiway a closed marking shall be placed at least at each
endextremity of the taxiway or portion thereof closed.


 Characteristics

    7.1.47.1.3.4 The closed taxiway marking shall be yellow and of the form and proportions as detailed
in Figure 7-1, Illustration ab)., when displayed on a taxiway. The marking shall be white when displayed
on a runway and shall be yellow when displayed on a taxiway.

    Note 1.— When an area is temporarily closed, frangible barriers or markings utilizing materials other
than paint or other suitable means may be used to identify the closed area.

   Note 2.— Procedures pertaining to the planning, coordination, monitoring and safety management of
works in progress on the movement area are specified in the PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981).

                        Editorial Note.— Relocate Figure 7-1 below 7.1.3.4, Note 2.

                                      7.1.4   Closed runway lighting

Application

    7.1.4.1 Recommendation.— Where operationally desirable, at an aerodrome provided with runway
lighting, closed runway lighting should be provided on runway (s) that are temporarily closed or
temporarily restricted for take-off.

    Note 1.— The purpose of the closed runway lighting is to reduce the likelihood of unintended landings
during periods of poor visibility or at night whenever the runway lighting must be switched on for electrical
maintenance.

     Note 2.— In dusk or poor visibility conditions by day, lighting can be more effective than markings.

     Note 3.— The closed runway lighting is intended to be controlled either automatically or manually by
air traffic services or by the aerodrome operator.

Location

   7.1.4.2 A closed runway lighting shall be placed on the centre line near each extremity of the runway
temporarily declared closed.

    Note.— Placement of a closed runway lighting would enhance the situational awareness of the runway
closure to the pilot.


Characteristics

    7.1.4.3 The closed runway lighting as viewed by the pilot shall be of the equivalent elevated form
and proportions as detailed in Figure 7-2, showing a minimum of five lights uniformly spaced on each
branch, with a minimum interval as specified by Table 7-1.

                   Table 7-1.   Minimum interval between closed runway lights centres
                                                                                                      51


              Number of lights per branch                  Minimum interval between lights centres
                           5                                              1.5 m
                           7                                              1.0 m
                           9                                              0.8 m

      Note 1.— The closed runway lighting may be either fixed or mobile.

    Note 2.— The fixed closed runway lighting may be formed as if shadowed (i.e. stretched) from the
equivalent elevated structure (see Appendix 3, Note 3). Guidance on the sizing of a fixed closed runway
lighting is given in the Aerodrome Design Manual (Doc 9157), Part 4.

                                 Editorial Note.— Insert new Figure 7-2




                                                                Min 1.5 m




  Figure 7-2.     Example of equivalent elevated closed runway lighting with five lights per branch

                        Editorial Note.— Renumber subsequent figures as needed.

   7.1.4.4 Closed runway lights shall show flashing variable white in the direction of approach to the
runway, at a rate of one second on and one second off.

    7.1.4.5 Closed runway lights shall automatically revert to fixed lights in the event of the flashing
system failure.

    7.1.4.6 Closed runway lights shall be in accordance with the specifications in Appendix 2,
Figure A2-27.

...
52

                                         7.4     Unserviceable areas

                                         Insert new text as follows:

                                     7.4.1     Unserviceability markings

Application

   7.4.1.1 Recommendation.— Where operationally required, unserviceability signs should be
supplemented by unserviceability markings on the surface of the pavement.

    7.4.1.2 Where it is impracticable to install an unserviceability sign in accordance with 7.4.3.1, an
unserviceability marking shall be provided on the surface of the pavement.
Location

     7.4.1.3 Recommendation.— Unserviceability markings should be displayed across the surface of
the taxiway or apron where necessary and positioned so as to be legible from the cockpit of an approaching
aircraft.

     Characteristics

     7.4.1.4   Unserviceability markings shall consist of an inscription in black upon an orange background.

   7.4.1.5 Recommendation.— The inscriptions should be in the form and proportions shown in
Appendix 3.

    7.4.1.6 Recommendation.— The background should be rectangular and extend a minimum of 0.5 m
laterally and vertically beyond the extremities of the inscription.

                                                End of new text.


               Editorial Note.— Relocate Section 7.4 under new 7.4.2, with modifications.

                                               7.4 Unserviceable areas

                                         7.4.2     Unserviceability lights


Application

    7.4.1 7.4.2.1 Unserviceabilitymarkers lights shall bedisplayed provided on a movement area used at
night, wherever any portion ofa taxiway, apron or holding bay the movement area is unfit for the movement
of aircraft but it is still possible for aircraft to bypass the area safely. On a movement area used at night,
unserviceability lights shall be used.

    Note 1.— Unserviceabilitymarkers and lights are used for such purposes as warning pilots of a hole in
a taxiway or apron pavement or outlining a portion of pavement, such as on an apron, that is under repair.
They are not suitable for use when a portion of a runway becomes unserviceable, nor on a taxiway when a
major portion of the width becomes unserviceable. In such instances, the runway or taxiway is normally
closed.

   Note 2.— Procedures pertaining to the planning, coordination, monitoring and safety management of
works in progress on the movement area are specified in the PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981).
                                                                                                          53



Location

    7.4.2 7.4.2.2 Unserviceabilitymarkers and lights shall be placed at intervals sufficiently close so as to
delineate the unserviceable area.

    Note.— Guidance on the location of unserviceability lights is given in Attachment A, Section 13.


Characteristics of unserviceability markers

    7.4.3 Unserviceability markers shall consist of conspicuous upstanding devices such as flags, cones
or marker boards.


Characteristics of unserviceability lights

    7.4.4 7.4.2.3 An unserviceability light shall consist of a red fixed light. The light shall have an
intensity sufficient to ensure conspicuity considering the intensity of the adjacent lights and the general
level of illumination against which it would normally be viewed. In no case shall the intensity be less than
10 cd of red light.

                                        Insert new text as follows:

                                       7.4.3   Unserviceability signs

    Note 1.— Temporary changes to the movement area may include, inter alia, reduction in the runway
length, reduction in the maximum allowable wingspan, taxiway closure or any other closure to the
movement area. Unserviceability signs provide relevant information to aerodrome users to maintain an
acceptable level of safety during aircraft and vehicle operations, by reducing the risk of confusion and
enhancing the awareness of such temporary changes.

    Note 2.— Unserviceability signs can be used to indicate temporary closed or restricted areas, as well
as to provide information on operational restrictions to aerodrome users.


Application

   7.4.3.1 Unserviceability signs shall be provided where there is an operational need to indicate
temporary changes to runway declared distances.

   7.4.3.2 Recommendation.— Unserviceability signs should be provided where there is an
operational need to indicate temporary changes to taxiways and aprons.

    7.4.3.3 Existing signs shall be removed or obscured at an aerodrome if they provide inadequate or
misleading information regarding unserviceability areas.

    7.4.3.4 The information provided by unserviceability signs shall not be in conflict with the
information provided by the appropriate aeronautical information services.

   Note .— The information provided by unserviceability signs supplements that which is provided by the
appropriate aeronautical information services unit.
54

Location

   7.4.3.5 Unserviceability signs shall be located where operationally needed on the movement area.
The location distances on the manoeuvring area shall be as per taxiing guidance signs in Table 5-5.

    7.4.3.6 The location of unserviceability signs shall not visually obscure or provide conflicting
information with existing operationally required visual aids.


Characteristics

    7.4.3.7 Unserviceability signs shall be frangible. Those located near a runway or taxiway shall be
sufficiently low to preserve clearance for propellers and the engine pods of jet aircraft. The installed height
of unserviceability signs shall not exceed the dimension for taxiing guidance signs shown in Table 5-5.

    7.4.3.8   Unserviceability signs shall be rectangular, as shown in Figure 7-3, with the longer side
horizontal.

   7.4.3.9 The inscriptions on an unserviceability sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of
Appendix 4.

   7.4.3.10 Unserviceability signs shall consist of an inscription in black on an orange background.
Unserviceability signs shall be supplemented by a black outline measuring 10 mm in width for runways
where the code number is 1 or 2, and 20 mm in width for runways where the code number is 3 or 4.

   7.4.3.11 The inscription on an unserviceability sign shall consist of a legible, clear and simple
message, only providing the useful and necessary information for the safety of the operation.

     Note.— See Figure 7-3 for examples of unserviceability signs.

   7.4.3.12 Unserviceability signs shall be retroreflective in accordance with the provisions of
Appendix 4.

    7.4.3.13 Recommendation.— Where there is a need to enhance the conspicuity of unserviceability
signs, they should be supplemented by two red or yellow simultaneously flashing lights. The intensity and
the beam spread of these lights should be in accordance with the specifications in Appendix 2,
Figure A2-24.
                                                                                                               55




         Construction works area                         CONSTRUCTION AHEAD




         Construction works area end                     END CONSTRUCTION




         Reduced TORA                                   REDUCED 08L – TORA 3 000 m




         Maximum allowable wingspan                      MAX SPAN 65 m



                             Figure 7-3.       Examples of unserviceability signs


                                       7.4.4     Unserviceability markers

Application

    7.4.4.1 Unserviceability markers shall be displayed wherever any portion of a taxiway, apron or
holding bay is unfit for the movement of aircraft but it is still possible for aircraft to bypass the area safely.

    Note.— Unserviceability markers are used for such purposes as warning pilots of a hole in a taxiway
or apron pavement or outlining a portion of pavement, such as on an apron, that is under repair. They are
not suitable for use when a portion of a runway becomes unserviceable, nor on a taxiway when a major
portion of the width becomes unserviceable. In such instances, the runway or taxiway is normally closed.


Location

    7.4.4.2 Unserviceability markers shall be placed at intervals sufficiently close, so as to delineate the
unserviceable area.


Characteristics

    7.4.4.3 Unserviceability markers shall consist of conspicuous upstanding devices such as flags, cones
or marker boards.


                                                 End of new text.
56


Characteristics of unserviceability cones
   7.4.5 7.4.4.4 Recommendation.— An unserviceability cone should be at least 0.5 m in height and red,
orange or yellow or any one of these colours in combination with white.

   Characteristics of unserviceability flags
   7.4.6 7.4.4.5 Recommendation.— An unserviceability flag should be at least 0.5 m square and red,
orange or yellow or any one of these colours in combination with white.

    Characteristics of unserviceability marker boards
    7.4.7 7.4.4.6 Recommendation.— An unserviceability marker board should be at least 0.5 m in height
and 0.9 m in length, with alternate red and white or orange and white vertical stripes.



                                  CHAPTER 8.        ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS

                       8.1   Electrical power supply systems for air navigation facilities

...

      Visual aids


      Application
...


   8.1.10 Recommendation.— The following aerodrome facilities should be provided with a secondary
power supply capable of supplying power when there is a failure of the primary power supply:

      ...

      c) approach, runway and taxiway lighting as specified in8.1.6 to 8.1.9;

      d) closed runway lighting, if provided in accordance with 7.1.4.1 and connected to the primary power
         supply;

      de) meteorological equipment;

      ef) essential security lighting, if provided in accordance with 9.11;

      fg) essential equipment and facilities for the aerodrome responding emergency agencies;

      gh) floodlighting on a designated isolated aircraft parking position if provided in accordance with
          5.3.24.1; and

      hi) illumination of apron areas over which passengers may walk.

   Note.— Specifications for secondary power supply for radio navigation aids and ground elements of
communications systems are given in Annex 10, Volume I, Chapter 2.

...
                                                                                                         57


                                               8.2   System design
...

    8.2.4 The electrical systems for the power supply and the control of the closed runway lighting shall
be so designed that the closed runway lighting system is operated independently of runway lighting systems.

...

                      CHAPTER 9. AERODROME OPERATIONAL SERVICES,
                             EQUIPMENT AND INSTALLATIONS

                                    9.1   Aerodrome emergency planning

General

...

    9.1.3 The plan shall coordinate the response or participation of all existing agencies which, in the
opinion of the appropriate authority, could be of assistance in responding to an emergency.

      Note 1.— Examples of agencies are:

      — on the aerodrome: air traffic control units, rescue and firefighting services, aerodrome
        administration, medical and ambulance services, aircraft operators, ground handling service
        providers, security services, and police;

...

                                        9.5   Apron management service

...

   9.5.5 Recommendation.—Aircraft should be allocated to an aircraft stand or apron area
appropriate to the aircraft characteristics.

    9.5.6 Recommendation.― A risk assessment should be carried out if there is a need to allocate
aircraft parking to areas other than aircraft stands or apron areas.

    Note .—The need to allocate aircraft to other areas could arise from situations such as mass diversions,
special events, adverse weather conditions, contingency requirements, work in progress, etc..

   9.5.7 Recommendation.— When allocating an aircraft to an aircraft stand, the following
parameters should be considered:

      a) parking aids;

      b) facilities serving the aircraft stand;

      c) proximity of infrastructure;

      d) other parked aircraft in the neighbouring aircraft stands;
58


      e) aircraft stand dependencies; and

      f)   jet blast and propeller wash related protection.


Apron Safety

    9.5.5 9.5.8 An emergency vehicle responding to an emergency shall be given priority over all other
surface movement traffic.

      9.5.6 9.5.9 A vehicle operating on an apron shall:

...

      9.5.10   Aircraft shall be guided while arriving on or departing from the aircraft stand.

      Note.— Means for guidance can be a visual docking guidance systems, personnel, lighting or markings.

    9.5.711 An aircraft stand shall be visually monitored in-person or remotely to ensure that the
recommended clearance distances are provided to an aircraft using the stand maintained.

    Note.— Stand dependencies may occur when multiple centre lines are used on the same stand, creating
possible variations in fixed or mobile obstacle separations with adjacent stands.

    9.5.12 Emergency stop procedures shall be in place to stop an aircraft when entering the stand if the
safety of operations on the aircraft stand is compromised.

    Note.— Procedures on the training of operational personnel, and on apron safety and operations, are
specified in the PANS-Aerodromes (Doc 9981), Part II, Chapters 1 and 7.

    9.5.13 Personnel, other than those required to assist the initial arrival and departure of the aircraft,
shall not be allowed to approach the aircraft when anti-collision lights are turned on and engines are running.

      Note.— This does not apply to helicopter operations as per Annex 6, Part 3.

      9.5.14   Parked aircraft shall be appropriately secured to prevent any unintended movement.

...

                9.6   Ground servicing of aircraft Aircraft fuelling – Safety considerations

    9.6.1 Fire extinguishing equipment suitable for at least initial intervention in the event of a fuel fire
and personnel trained in its use shall be readily available during the ground servicing of an aircraft fuelling
operations, and there shall be a means of quickly summoning the rescue and firefighting service in the event
of a fire or major fuel spill.

    9.6.2 When aircraft refuelling operations take place while passengers are embarking, on board or
disembarking, ground equipment shall be positioned so as to allow:

      a) the use of a sufficient number of exits for expeditious evacuation; and

      b) a ready escape route from each of the exits to be used in an emergency.
                                                                                                            59


                                           9.7   Ground handling

                                    (Applicable as of 26 November 2026)

    Note 1.— Ground handling can be provided by an aircraft operator, an aerodrome operator or an
independent organization. When provided by an aircraft operator or an aerodrome operator, this
organization is also considered, as a ground handling service provider (GHSP).

   Note 2.— A list of ground handling services is provided in the Manual on Ground Handling
(Doc 10121), Appendix B.

      9.7.1   States shall regularly assess the impact of ground handling operations on aviation safety.

    Note.— Guidance on the assessment of the impact of ground handling operations on aviation safety is
provided in the Manual on Ground Handling (Doc 10121), Chapter 2.

   9.7.2. Recommendation.— States should establish criteria for the safety oversight of ground
handling as part of their State Safety Programme (SSP).

   Note 1.— Guidance on the establishment of criteria for the safety oversight of ground handling, and
approaches for safety oversight are contained in the Manual on Ground Handling (Doc 10121)

    Note 2.— Provisions on periodically reviewing the need to extend SMS to additional aviation sectors
are contained in Annex 19 – Safety Management. Examples of additional aviation sectors can include
GHSP.

Editorial Note.— Renumber subsequent paragraphs.

...

                             CHAPTER 10.         AERODROME MAINTENANCE
...

                                                 10.5   Visual aids
...

     10.5.1 A light shall be deemed to be unserviceable when the main beam average intensity is less than
50 per cent of the value specified in the appropriate figure in Appendix 2. For light units where the designed
main beam average intensity is above the value shown in Appendix 2, the 50 per cent value shall be related
to that design value. For light units where the main beam average intensity is required to be higher than the
value specified in the appropriate figure in Appendix 2, a light shall be deemed to be unserviceable when
the main beam average intensity value is less than 50 per cent of this higher value and not the value specified
in Appendix 2.

   Note.— Guidance on maintenance criteria for aeronautical ground lights, on the use of a site standard
and on using a higher main beam average intensity is contained in the Aerodrome Design Manual
(Doc 9157), Part 4.

...
60

  10.5.8 The system of preventive maintenance employed for a stop bar provided at a runway-holding
position used in conjunction with a runway intended for operations in runway visual range conditions less
than a value of 350 300 m shall have the following objectives:

      a) no more than two lights will remain unserviceable; and

      b) two adjacent lights will not remain unserviceable unless the light spacing is significantly less than
         that specified.

    10.5.9 The system of preventive maintenance employed for a taxiway intended for use in runway visual
range conditions less than a value of 350 300 m shall have as its objective that no two adjacent taxiway
centre line lights be unserviceable.

...

              APPENDIX 2. AERONAUTICAL GROUND LIGHT CHARACTERISTICS
...

4.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

      Figure A2-1.     Isocandela diagram for approach centre line light and crossbars (white light)

...

4.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

                Figure A2-2.    Isocandela diagram for approach side row light (red light)
...

3.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

                     Figure A2-3.   Isocandela diagram for threshold light (green light)
...

3.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

              Figure A2-4.     Isocandela diagram for threshold wing bar light (green light)

...

3.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.
                Figure A2-5. Isocandela diagram for touchdown zone light (white light)
...

4.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

     Figure A2-6.     Isocandela diagram for runway centre line light with 30 m longitudinal spacing
                      (white light) and rapid exit taxiway indicator light (yellow light)
...

4.        See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

     Figure A2-7.     Isocandela diagram for runway centre line light with 15 m longitudinal spacing
                      (white light) and rapid exit taxiway indicator light (yellow light)
...
                                                                                                          61


2.      See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

                 Figure A2-8.     Isocandela diagram for runway end light (red light)
...

5.      See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

      Figure A2-9.     Isocandela diagram for runway edge light where width of runway is 45 m
                                             (white light)
...

5.      See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.

      Figure A2-10.    Isocandela diagram for runway edge light where width of runway is 60 m
                                            (white light)
...


Collective notes to Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27

...

    4. Average intensity ratio. The ratio between the average intensity within the ellipse defining the main
beam of a typical new light and the average light intensity of the main beam of a new runway edge light
shall be as follows:

     4. The average intensity within the ellipse defining the main beam of a new light is established as a
ratio of the minimum (1.0) average intensity of a new Runway edge light. The ratios also define the
maximum allowed main beam average intensity for the lights in the lighting system supporting runway
operations. Guidance on maintenance criteria for aeronautical ground lights and the use of a site standard
is contained in the Aerodrome Design Manual (Doc 9157), Part 4.

        Figure A2-1      Approach centre line and crossbars               1.5 to 2.0 2.0 to 3.0 (white light)

        ...

        Figure A2-9      Runway edge (45 m runway width)                  1.0 to 1.5 (white light)

        Figure A2-10     Runway edge (60 m runway width)                  1.0 to 1.5 (white light)


...

 Figure A2-12. Isocandela diagram for taxiway centre line (15 m spacing), RELs, no-entry bar and
 stop bar lights in straight sections intended for use in runway visual range conditions of less than a
    value of 350 300 m where large offsets can occur and for low-intensity runway guard lights,
                                            Configuration B

...
62

 Figure A2-13. Isocandela diagram for taxiway centre line (15 m spacing), no-entry bar and stop bar
 lights in straight sections intended for use in runway visual range conditions of less than a value of
                                                350 300 m

...

 Figure A2-14. Isocandela diagram for taxiway centre line (7.5 m spacing), RELs, no-entry bar and
 stop bar lights in curved sections intended for use in runway visual range conditions of less than a
                                          value of 350 300 m

...

  Figure A2-15. Isocandela diagram for taxiway centre line (30 m, 60 m spacing), no-entry bar and
stop bar lights in straight sections intended for use in runway visual range conditions of 350 300 m or
                                                  greater

...

 Figure A2-16. Isocandela diagram for taxiway centre line (7.5 m, 15 m, 30 m spacing), no-entry bar
     and stop bar lights in curved sections intended for use in runway visual range conditions of
                                         350 300 m or greater
...

                  Figure A2-24. Isocandela diagram for each light in low-intensity
                    runway guard lights, Configuration A and for flashing lights
                               supplementing unserviceability signs
...

2.     See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, and A2-26 and A2-27.


         Figure A2-26.    Isocandela diagram for take-off and hold lights (THL) (red light)



                                 Editorial Note.— Insert new figure.
                                                                                                        63




           Notes:
                                                          x2 y2                a    10   15
                1. Curves calculated on formula             +    =1
                                                          a2 b 2               b    10   15


                2. N is the total number of lights of the closed runway lighting.

                3. See collective notes for Figures A2-1 to A2-11, A2-26 and A2-27.

              Figure A2-27.    Isocandela diagram for closed runway lights (white light)

...

                    APPENDIX 4. REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING DESIGN OF
                                 TAXIING GUIDANCE SIGNS

Note.— See Chapter 5, Section 5.4, for specifications on the application, location and characteristics of
signs.

...
64

    9. The forms of characters, i.e. letters, numbers, arrows and symbols for mandatory instruction and
information signs, shall conform to those shown in Figure A4-2. The width of characters and the space
between individual characters shall be determined as indicated in Table A4-1.

    Note.— Guidance on the width of characters and the space between individual characters for RDRS is
contained in the Aerodrome Design Manual (Doc 9157), Part 4 — Visual Aids.
...

    11. The face width of mandatory instruction and information signs shall be determined using
Figure A4-4 except that, where a mandatory instruction sign is provided on one side of a taxiway only, the
face width shall not be less than:
...

      12. The face width of runway distance remaining sign (RDRS) shall be determined using Figure A4-5.

      123. Borders
...

      134. The colours of signs shall be in accordance with the appropriate specifications in Appendix 1.
...

                                 Editorial Note.— Insert new Figure A4-5




                   Explanatory Note to Figure A4-5: "H" stands for the inscription height.

                                Figure A4-5.    Sign dimensions for RDRS



                              ATTACHMENT A. GUIDANCE MATERIAL
                            SUPPLEMENTARY TO ANNEX 14, VOLUME I
...

                                         Insert new text as follows:

                             23. Runway distance remaining signs (RDRSs)

    23.1 Runway distance remaining signs (RDRSs) do not have to be provided at all aerodromes. An
aerodrome considering the installation of such signs may wish to assess their need individually, depending
on factors such as runway length, aerodrome elevation, aerodrome geometry, traffic levels, lack of runway
end safety area, lack of runway friction and climate.
                                                                                                        65


    23.2 RDRSs are placed along the full length of the runway at longitudinal spacing of 300 m (±30 m),
parallel and equidistant from the runway centre line as in Configurations A, B or C, illustrated in
Figure A-10. RDRSs are arranged by any of three different configurations as shown in Figure A-10.

    23.3 In Configuration A, the RDRSs consist of double-faced signs and are located on both sides of
the runway. Where the runway length is not an exact multiple of 300 m, the signs are placed at locations
where the runway total length is divided equally.

    23.4 In Configuration B, the RDRSs consist of double-faced signs and are located on both sides of
the runway. Where the runway length is not an exact multiple of 300 m, one-half of the excess distance is
added to the distance of each sign from each runway extremity. To illustrate the case where the distance
between the end of the runway and the sign is the maximum, for a runway length of 1 950 m, the excess
distance is 150 m and the location of the last sign on each runway end is 300 m plus one-half of 150 m, or
375 m. This configuration allows a maximum of 375 m at the end of the runway, but the other signs are
exactly 300 m apart. The signs may be omitted on one side of the runway because of clearance conflict or
by design.

    Note.― For Configurations A and B, the signs may be omitted on one side of the runway because of
clearance conflict or by design.

    23.5 In Configuration C, the RDRSs consist of single-faced signs and are located on one side of each
runway, viewed in the direction of take-off or landing. The advantage of Configuration C is that the runway
distance remaining is more accurately reflected for a runway length that is not an exact multiple of 300 m.

    23.6   An RDRS may be omitted if the sign cannot be placed within the tolerance of ±30 m.
66

Editorial Note.— Insert new Figure A-10 below paragraph 23.6




                                                                                                              *   150 m

            325 m                                                                     300 m
                                                                          375 m


                    1                1                                                          1                 300 m

                                                    1                1                300 m
            325 m
                                                                          300 m
                                                                                                                  300 m


                                                                                      300 m
            325 m                                                         300 m
                                                                                                                  300 m


                                                                                      300 m
            325 m                                                         300 m
                                                                                                                  300 m


                                                                                      300 m
                                                                          300 m
            325 m
                                                                                                                  300 m
                    1                1             1                 1
                                                                                      300 m                   1
            325 m                                                         375 m
                                                                                                                  300 m
                                                                                  150 m         *

                    Configuration A                 Configuration B                             Configuration C


             Note 1.— Examples based on a 1 950 m runway length.
             Note 2.— Signs less than 300 m from take-off end, as indicated by asterisks(*) may be omitted.




                    Figure A-10.           Runway distance remaining sign configurations

                                                        End of new text.




                                                           — END —
